Behind a high fence and dense vegetation in the depths of Galatasaray Square we can see the building complex of Galatasaray Lyceum, which is rightfully considered the oldest and one of the most prestigious educational institutions in Turkey. Bayezid II founded it in the late 15th century.
According to the legend, one day the sultan went hunting in the suburbs of Galata. Here he came across the hut of a certain Gul-Baba, surrounded by a beautiful garden, decorated with lots of yellow and red roses.
For taking care of the garden, Bayezid decided to fulfill any request of Gul-Baba, to which the latter asked that a school and a hospital be built near his hut. The sultan kept his promise. Thus, a school, a hospital and even his own hammam appeared in Galata, and an experienced gardener became the first director of the organization.
From the second half of the seventeenth century the best pupils of the Galata Imperial School were admitted to the sultan's palace.
Many prominent politicians and intellectuals of the Ottoman Empire came out of these walls.
The school received a new round of development in the second half of the nineteenth century, after the reigning Sultan Abdul-Aziz made a tour of European countries.
The monarch was so fascinated by the French educational system that he decided to introduce something similar to it at home.
Turks, French, Armenians and Greeks were appointed as teachers, and students learned several languages at once, the most important of which were Persian and Arabic.
At the beginning of the last century the lyceum founded a soccer team, the famous Galatasaray, which later became Turkey's first ever UEFA Super Cup winner.
The title of Sultan's Lyceum was acquired only after the fall of the Ottoman Empire, and half a century later not only boys, but girls as well were allowed to study there.
The prestige of the lyceum is still high. The competition for admission here is up to a thousand people per place! And it is not surprising, because the graduates of the school receive a French bachelor's degree and can be enrolled in any French high school without examinations.