Galata Hill is decorated with the tower of the same name. It was built in the first half of the fourteenth century by the Genoese on the site of the early Byzantine lighthouse.
Originally the tower was part of the Genoese city fortifications, serving as an observation point and a kind of reference point for passing ships.
When it was built it was crowned with a cross, so the tower was often called the ""tower of Christ"".
After the conquest of Constantinople by the Turks it was decided to remove the cross along with the dome, due to which the original height of the construction decreased by almost seven meters. Sultan Murad III used the former fortifications as an observatory, and the lower floors were used as cells for prisoners.
Later it was used for some time as a fire tower, so it was often called the ""Big Fire Tower"".
A landmark in the history of the Galata Tower was in 1632, when a scientist named Hezarfen Ahmed Chelebi jumped from its summit on homemade wings. The local Icarus successfully crossed the Bosporus and landed on the Asian shore.
Murad the Fourth, who watched the flight, publicly declared that such a brave man could achieve anything he wished. However, Murad's sultanic advisors convinced Murad that such upstarts were detrimental to the state of affairs in the empire.
Hezarthan was handed a purse of gold coins and sent into exile in Algeria, where he died a few years later. Nevertheless, he was not forgotten in the city and the Galata Tower was renamed Hesarphen Tower.
Unfortunately, not much has survived of the Genoese construction. Standing at the top of the hill, it often suffered from earthquakes and fires. However, because of its convenient location it was repaired and rebuilt over and over again.
The Galata Tower gained its present appearance only in the sixties. The stairs were replaced by elevators.
Nowadays, the top floors of the tower are occupied by a very posh restaurant and an excellent viewing platform from which one can enjoy wonderful views of the streets of Galata, the neighboring Pera district and blocks of the historic center.