The tiny Hüseyin-Agi Mosque is noticeably lost against the background of the city's buildings. However, it is one of the oldest buildings on Istiklal Street.
It was built at the end of the sixteenth century on money of Hussein-aga. This nobleman started his career as the chief of the white eunuchs during the reign of Murad III.
However, Mehmed III, who came to replace him in the sultan's palace, preferred black eunuchs and therefore he appointed the main associate of his predecessor to the new position of sheikhul-kharem' that is, the guardian of the holy cities of Islam Mecca and Medina.
In the year one thousand five hundred and eighty-two Hussain-aga departed from Istanbul for his new appointment. In addition to his spiritual leadership, the Sheikhul-kharem also exercised state power in the territories entrusted to him. He administered the court, supervised the water supply and the payment of salaries to janissaries, solved all kinds of disputes and conflicts, and prepared reports to the sultan on the work done.
After his return to Istanbul, the wise Hussein-aga was appointed principal of the Court School in Galata, now known as the Galatasaray Lyceum.
Under the new director, the complex behind the city wall was enlarged with madrasahs, barracks, a kitchen and this small mosque. Thanks to his transformations, a small Muslim settlement grew up in the Pera area.
After his death, Hussein-aga was buried in the grounds of his own mosque. Here, too, the other chief of the sultan's group of court servants, Davud-aga, found his last resting place.
In addition to the tombs in the courtyard, the elegant fountain from Sinan Pasha Mosque attracts attention. Its construction is attributed to the best architect of the Ottoman Empire, Mimar Sinan, and is referred to in some sources as ""the masterpiece of Turkish stone carving.""
He So long ago, the modest Hüseyin-Agha Mosque reopened its doors after a global reconstruction. It so happened that for centuries it was the only Muslim shrine in the area. No wonder crowds of worshippers always gather here for Friday prayers.