In the immediate vicinity of the Galata Bridge is the entrance to the tunnel, one of the most unusual branches of the subway in Istanbul's public transportation system.
Its history began in the nineteenth century when the neighborhoods of Karaköy and Beyoglu became unusually crowded. Located on a hill, they created a lot of difficulties for the people who lived and worked there. Every day at least forty thousand people had to climb the sixty-meter hill.
One of them was the French engineer Eugene-Henri Gavan, who visited the city in 1867 as a tourist.
He was so tired of climbing the mountain that he decided to propose to the authorities that a funicular be built to connect the foot of the hill with the top. A year later the final design was presented to the Grand Porte.
The reigning Sultan Abdul-Aziz supported the idea, but the Prussian invasion of France made it impossible for a French company to carry out the project. As a result, Havana had to register its enterprise in Great Britain, which delayed construction for several years. It was not until January 1875 that the Istanbul Tunnel carried its first passengers.
At the time of its construction it was one of the first branches of underground transport in Europe, and one of the shortest at that. The length of the tunnel is a little less than 600 meters, and to the top station modern cars climb in about a minute and a half.  However they weren't always so frisky. At the time of construction, the road looked somewhat different; two-car wooden trains climbed to the top thanks to steam traction. The first car was used to carry freight and animals, while the second was used for first and second class passengers, respectively.
After the 1971 reconstruction, the two-lane line was converted to a single-lane line with a turnout in the middle, at the same time the steam traction cable was replaced by electric traction, and both carriages were made fully passenger.
Nowadays, the tunnel, incorporated into the urban transportation system, has lost some of its importance. However, even now it saves a lot of energy for those climbing to the top of Galata Hill.