The monumental Galata Bridge connects the center of Istanbul with the neighborhood of Karaköy. Its two-story construction is not remarkable in architectural terms, however, it allows you to easily cross from one side of the Golden Horn to the other and enjoy the magnificent panoramic views of Istanbul.
The idea to build the crossing over the Golden Horn dates back to the reign of Constantine the Great, but it could be realized only during the reign of Justinian. The Byzantine bridge was covered with wooden planking boards and was located near today's Eitbpah Mosque.
It was to be crossed with extreme caution. Passing carts bounced the planks like piano keys, constantly kicking those who were too lazy to walk.
What became of that bridge is not known. But by the time the Turks came, all that was left of it was a memory.
The first attempts to build a more or less passable crossing were made during the reign of Sultan Bayezid the Second in the early sixteenth century. For a design competition, even Leonardo da Vinci submitted his designs.
But the sultan, who himself invited the genius to participate in the contest, backed out. Probably because he was afraid that the ornate construction would not last a day.
After Bayazid's death the crossing was forgotten for long three hundred years. The ruling sultans were led on by the boatmen, who tried their best to maintain their income.
The vicious circle of bribery was broken only at the beginning of the nineteenth century through the efforts of Mahmud the Second. A pontoon bridge was then used as a crossing to the other side, but since it hindered the passage of ships, it was abandoned after nine years.
The first substantial bridge was built at the request of Abdul Majid's mother, Bezmianem Valide Sultan.
At first, the bridge was even named after Walide. There was a toll to cross it from the very first days. Moreover, the crew, the man with the luggage and the average pedestrian had to pay different sums for crossing.
Later, the Galata Bridge was repeatedly rebuilt. The current construction, the fifth in a row, was erected in the nineties to replace the previous one, which was badly damaged in a fire.
Today the double-decker bridge is not only a crossing, but also a place for recreation and entertainment.
So the upper tier besides the streetcars, cars and pedestrians are fond of the numerous fishermen, who stand here in almost all weathers. And on the lower tier there are stores, restaurants and cafes, where you can easily try fresh fish.
The coffee houses become especially crowded in the evening, when various crowds gather here for a cup of tea or coffee, watching the setting sun paint the waters of the bay with gold.