The modern neighborhood of Karaköy, which is now part of the Beyoğlu district, was simply called Galata a century and a half ago. It stretched from the Golden Horn Bay to the top of the hill, which adorns the Galata Tower.
The history of Galata began in antiquity, when Istanbul was still called Byzantium. According to scientists, at that time there were pastures of goats and sheep on the opposite shore of the bay. There was also a dairy market (translated from Greek as ""galactus"").
From here, most likely, came the name of the settlement Galata.
Constantine the Great made it a suburb of Constantinople, and Theodosius the Second included it in the city limits as the thirteenth district.
In the second half of the thirteenth century, after the Genoese had helped the Byzantine Empire defeat the Latin Empire and regain Constantinople, Emperor Michael Eighth in gratitude gave the Genoese Galata and the suburb of Pera above it.
At first the overseas visitors established their shipyards and trading posts here, but as early as 1267 Galata became a separate European city under a governor appointed by the Genoese Republic.
The overseas colony grew rapidly and became rich. The peace-loving Genoese became so insolent that they once almost arrested the Byzantine emperor for his debts. Nevertheless, in difficult times, when Constantinople was approached by the Ottoman army, it was the Genoese who first came to the aid of the city in distress.
After the fall of the Byzantine Empire, Galata was populated by an even more diverse and multilingual public. Spaniards, Venetians, Arabs and Jews flocked to Galata after persecution and oppression at home, and in the 1920s a large diaspora of Russian White Guards and their families settled on the slopes of the hill.
Even today, Galata remains one of Istanbul's most Europeanized neighborhoods. The city has long been absent from city maps, but its memory lives on in the names of landmarks such as Galata Bridge, Galata Tower and Galatasaray Lyceum.