The elegant palazzo, built according to all the canons of classical Italian architecture on Meshrutet Street, is the Corpi Palace.
It was built in the second half of the 19th century for the rich Genoese shipowner Ignazio Korpi. The overseas guest wanted to build the most luxurious mansion in Galata, not surprisingly, he did not spare money for his own residence. Expensive materials for interior and exterior decoration were delivered from faraway Italian shores on the ships of Ignazio himself.
But here is the problem, when the construction was already in full swing, the hastening Genoese lord was blocked by a gypsy woman, who predicted that he would die as soon as he completed his palace. Ignazio Korpi, frightened by the prophecy, delayed the completion of the work in every way possible. It was not until ten years later that the magnificent palazzo was finally completed.
When the owner first entered the house, he immediately dropped dead on the floor. The terrible news spread throughout Istanbul in a matter of minutes. People were afraid to even walk past the cursed palace, let alone look inside. Onlookers said that the devil had surely entered the palace.
When Señor Korpi died, his nephews inherited the palace. They, too, were afraid to live in it, and there were not many people willing to buy the house.
Then the brothers decided to offer it to the American ambassador, whose palace looked more like a barn compared to European residences. But the laws of the United States did not allow to buy property abroad, so the mansion was leased to the embassy until the one thousand nine hundred and seventh year.
When the lease expired, the Korpi brothers again suggested that the acting ambassador buy the palace. 
Despite the fact that the harsh real estate law was still in force, John Leishman agreed to the deal, though for three times less than the amount spent on the erection of the palazzo's owner.
Leishman bought the embassy building with his own money. And when he came on vacation to Washington, over a long night of poker with a heavy dose of alcohol, he managed to convince the chairmen of the House and Budget committees to reimburse him for the expenses he had incurred.
Thus Korpi's palace became the first U.S. property in Europe and the only diplomatic mission building to win at cards.
The American Embassy, and later the Consulate, was housed inside the palazzo until the year two thousand and three, when a new building was built for it in another district, meeting all modern safety requirements.