Istanbul, as well as all of Turkey, is considered a true paradise for sweet tooth. From the number of desserts presented on the shelves of stores simply blurred in the eyes.
The number of different kinds of desserts alone amounts to more than two hundred. The only thing they have in common is the ingredients, often represented by all kinds of dough and milk, combined with fruit, nuts, starch and honey.
Of course, with such a huge selection to find your favorite treat is quite difficult. Fortunately, many candy shops and cafes allow you to taste the desserts before buying.
If we talk about the most popular dishes, it is certainly worth trying the favorite dessert of Hürrem Sultan Ayva Tatlisi, Turkish mannik Revani, crispy tubes Tulumbu, hot cheese dessert Kunefe, incredibly tender sweet Kadaif, something between halva and cotton candy called Pishmaniye, as well as the halva itself, which the locals call Helva.
And, of course, the sultan of Turkish sweet cuisine - baklava, or as it is called in Istanbul Baklava.
About the true history of the origin of this sweet the culinary experts of the West and the East argue until now. As the Turks assure us, baklava first cooked for Mehmed the Conqueror in one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year. This was even recorded in the Palace Cookbook, nowadays on display in the Topkapi Museum.
In those days, baklava was made from a hundred layers of the thinnest dough, through which one could see the moon or read the vizier's report. These sheets were lavishly topped with honey and nuts, long thought to be effective aphrodisiacs.
Of course, at first baklava was available only to the sultan and his entourage. Nowadays, every self-respecting Turkish housewife knows how to cook this popular dessert. Even at the matchmaking, the future bride feeds the groom's relatives baklava to show what a good wife she will be.
In modern baklava you can no longer find a hundred sheets of dough, even thirty-five is considered the highest professionalism. But access to the dessert is no longer limited to a select few.
A box of baklava accompanies weddings and christenings, birthdays and funerals, tea parties at home and visits to guests. There are so many varieties of baklava that you can eat a new delicacy every day.