Ali Muhiddin Haci Bekir"" is the name of Istanbul's oldest confectionery, opened in the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven.
Ali Muhiddin is considered by some to be the founding father of the beloved Turkish delicacy, rahat-lukum, but that is not quite true.
In fact, the exact date of origin of this wonderful dessert, as well as the name of the confectioner, has not survived in history. Most likely, the first time it was served to the Ottoman sultan in the late fifteenth - early sixteenth century. At the same time, the unusual name of rahat-lukum, which means ""piece of pleasure"" in Turkish, appeared.
There are several legends about the origin of this delicacy.
The first of them says that in those ancient times there lived a sultan-pleaser, who loved to spoil his concubines with all sorts of sweets. It was with a desire to surprise of his ladies, the ruler came to the chef, who literally overnight invented the rakhat-lukum.
Another legend refers to the same chefs of the Ottoman sultans. One day two of them competed for the leading position in the palace kitchen. As a result, each came up with a sweet and presented it to the judgment of his ruler.
But the first cook's sweet was so tough that the sultan broke his tooth, while the second one, combining starch, sugar syrup and rose water, created the most delicate delicacy that conquered the governor's heart forever.
For centuries, the recipe for the Turkish delight was kept a closely guarded secret. Only residents and guests of Topkapi Palace could enjoy the delicacy.
But only in one thousand seven hundred seventy six year Ali Muhiddin Haci Beqir Efendi came to Istanbul and opened his first candy shop.
He proved to be a very skilful craftsman. The confectioner replaced flour with starch in the sultan's recipes and invented the idea of adding nuts and other fillings to rahat-lukum.
Ali Muhiddin made rahat-lukum famous in Istanbul and other cities of the empire, and his recipe is used in the production of Turkey's main sweet to this day.
His grandson Mehmed at the end of the nineteenth century presented his grandfather's invention at the World's Fair in Brussels and was awarded a gold medal for it. Since then, rahat-lucum is considered one of the favorite oriental delicacies not only in Turkey but all over the world.