North of Golden Horn Bay is the modern district of Beyoglu, which differs radically from the historic center. For centuries the hilly shores of Beyoglu have been the residence of overseas merchants and ambassadors. At one time there was even a Genoese and then Venetian settlement here.
Thanks to so many foreigners, Beyoglu was at all times the most Europeanized district of Istanbul.
It was here that the first electric street lamps, the first hotel with hot water in every room, and the first city streetcar appeared.
Beyoglu retains the title of a modern and fashionable city today. It is rightfully considered the center of international politics, art and shopping, Istanbul youth rush here to spend their evenings. In addition, many historical attractions have been preserved in this area, since many buildings were built on the foundations of Genoese times. The only downside is that it's located in the hills, so make sure you're wearing comfortable shoes before you hit the road.
Our route starts at the Galata Bridge and leads uphill to Taksim Square. If you are not confident in your abilities, you can skip a few points by climbing the cable car from the foot to the top of the hill.
During our tour you will walk along the main pedestrian street of Istanbul Istiklal, see the famous Pera Palace Hotel and the legendary Galatasaray Lyceum and learn many interesting stories about the life of emigrants in Istanbul, who have made a significant contribution to the formation of Turkish culture.
The length of the walk is about three kilometers. Depending on the speed of the route and visiting churches and museums, it will take you from several hours to half a day to get acquainted with Beyoglu.
In total, thirty objects are marked on the audio guide map. You can listen to the first items for free, but to get access to all the objects, purchase the full version.
This tiny investment will not only help you save a lot on guides and excursions, but also see and learn much more than ninety-five percent of travelers manage to do. In addition, you will be able to use all the functions of the application without spending money on mobile roaming traffic.
To go directly to the route, click the "Start" button and discover the most European area of Istanbul!
