The territorial structure of Istanbul is complex and confusing. The districts are divided into semts, the borders of which are sometimes not even known by the residents of Istanbul themselves. So Jibali flows smoothly into the Fanar or Fener area, as the Turks call it.
Semt got its name in honor of the lighthouse lantern, which for many years decorated one of the towers of the city walls.
After the capture of Constantinople, the residents of the district did not resist the invaders, as a result of which they managed to keep their homes and many Byzantine shrines intact. However, over time, most of them still converted to mosques.
Mehmed II ordered all ethnic Greeks to move to this quarter, later representatives of prominent families of the Byzantine aristocracy joined them, and at the beginning of the seventeenth century the Patriarchate of Constantinople moved to Phanar.
A hundred years later it was a prominent center of the Ottoman Greek elite. Residents of the district were even called by a special word - Phanariots. Moreover, in high society they aroused respect and admiration, thanks to excellent diplomatic qualities, connections and money, sometimes achieving outstanding positions in the official apparatus of the sultan.
Sometimes Phanariots could even lead some Christian lands of the empire, in particular Moldavia and Wallachia, where, in fact, they were full masters.
However, tensions between Muslims and Christians periodically made themselves felt. And the First World War and the subsequent Greco-Turkish war led to the fact that most ethnic Greeks left Constantinople. Another wave of emigration occurred in nineteen fifty-fifth year, remembered for the Istanbul pogroms. Having suffered considerably in the fire of the fire of nineteen hundred and forty-one, households in the second half of the last century passed to the Muslim population of Turkey. There are very few hereditary Phanariots left here.
Nevertheless, even today the Lantern retains the title of the main center of Constantinople Orthodoxy and is an obligatory part of the program of Istanbul pilgrims.