Walking along the city walls, it is impossible not to remember the most terrible spring in their history - the spring of one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year.
By that time, the Byzantine Empire had almost fallen under the onslaught of the Ottomans. Surrounded on all sides by the Turks, Constantinople looked more like an annoying pimple and the ambitious Mehmed II decided to take the city.
About a year before, the Turks had built a small fortress at the narrowest point of the Bosphorus, the Dardanelles were also controlled by the Ottomans, which complicated the arrival of allies by sea.
Mehmed understood that his fleet was technologically inferior to the Byzantine one. Therefore, he made a bet on a land operation and firearms. Especially for this purpose, a certain Hungarian Urban cast a giant cannon capable of firing two hundred and seventy kilograms of kernels at a distance of up to one and a half kilometers.
The ancient walls did not allow the Byzantines to use modern cannons. There were only arrows and Greek fire on their defense.
The forces of the rivals turned out to be incomparable. About seven thousand Byzantines and allies against at least eighty thousand Ottomans, twenty-six ships against one hundred and fifty enemy ships.
Only the Genoese, led by the experienced commander Giovanni Giustiniani and a small handful of Venetians responded to all the appeals of Constantine XI for help. The Pope found nothing better than to send priests to the city instead of soldiers who advocated the reunification of the Orthodox and Catholic churches.
Nevertheless, even despite the significantly superior forces of the opponent, the city was defended for almost a month of the month. The Ottomans died by the thousands under the impregnable walls, while among the Byzantines the losses were minimal.
I was particularly pleased with the fleet, which managed to sink a significant part of the rival ships with the help of Greek fire.
The massive chain and the ships of the Venetians standing there did not let the Ottomans into the Golden Horn, and all attempts to break through the land walls ended in fiasco.
Then Mehmed decides on an unprecedented operation - to transfer the fleet to the Golden Horn Bay by land. This pretty much undermined the morale of the Byzantines, forcing them to disperse the already liquid troops along the walls along the bay. Giustiniani's attempts to set fire to the rival ships also failed.
The lunar eclipse that fell on the twenty-second of May caused even more confusion. The defenders of the city assessed the terrible thunderstorm that followed it as a bad sign.
Constantine understood that the days of the empire were numbered. And he himself stood up for the defense of the city along with his soldiers.
The Greek army of the emperor stood at the gate of St. Roman, Giustiniani and the Genoese occupied the area from the Fifth Military to the Charisian Gate, the Venetians defended the Blachernae. The last admiral of the Byzantine fleet, Luka Notara, with those who could somehow hold weapons, tried to resist the Ottoman ships in the Golden Horn Bay.
On the night of the twenty-eighth to the twenty-ninth of May, the Ottomans decided to strike the main blow. Particularly fierce battles were fought at the gate of St. Roman and near the Lycos River, where Giustiniani stood. Urban's cannon finally managed to breach the walls. The Ottomans rushed into the opening, but were immediately killed.
At the same time, Giustiniani was fatally wounded by a shell fragment on another tower. The Genoese, who had lost control, began to retreat randomly, leaving only the Byzantines and Venetians at the forefront of the defense.
Taking advantage of the turmoil, the Janissaries discovered a modest gate to the Kerkoport, which led to the Blachernae Palace. On that fateful day, for unknown reasons, it was unlocked. The Ottomans poured into the city, fortifying themselves on the adjacent towers. Under the shouts of ""The city is taken!"" a massive assault began from the Golden Horn.
The fatal battle was lost. Together with the defenders, the last Byzantine emperor also fell, and the invaders plundered the once beautiful city for three days, killing most of its inhabitants.
If you want to get more into the events of those bloody days, we advise you to take a look at the panorama museum one thousand four hundred and fifty-third, located at the former gate of St. Roman, now known as Topkapi. They are located near the last point of our route.