The majestic Mihrimah Sultan Mosque is considered one of the most striking works of the famous Mimar Sinan.
Mihrimah was the only and beloved daughter of Suleiman the Magnificent and his haseki Hurrem-sultan. Suleiman adored his princess so much that he indulged any of her whims and even listened to important state issues.
The girl received a brilliant education, was a real beauty and at the same time a very pious person.
Even in her youth, she conceived the idea of building her own mosque to pay tribute to Allah and perpetuate her name in history. The father supported his daughter's desire and even allocated money for her construction.
A hill near the pier in the Asian district of Uskyudar was chosen for construction, and in addition to the mosque, the complex included a madrasah, an elementary school, a hospital, a caravanserai and a kitchen.
The project was entrusted to the court architect Mimar Sinan. The old architect was secretly in love with a young beauty. However, she was already married to Rustem Pasha, and more than thirty years of age difference made this passion absolutely unattainable. Nevertheless, Sinan put his whole soul into the project. But the sultan's daughter still did not like his decision.
A few years after the death of her husband, the moon-faced princess decided to build another mosque, the one that you see now in front of you.
Mimar Sinan was again chosen as the architect. This time he erected a unique building with countless windows. The sun's rays, penetrating into the room through the stained glass windows, make it shine from the inside, like a beautiful crystal ball.
In order not to make the construction heavier, Sinan decided to abandon the internal columns, which is why the Mihrimah Sultan mosque has become even more elegant and feminine.
An uncharacteristic phenomenon for Islamic architecture was a single-standing minaret. According to legend, he personified the unrequited love of the architect himself. However, Mihrimah put her understanding into this symbol, like loneliness after her husband's death.
Another legend says that the architect presented the beautiful beauty with another gift.
He designed the mosques so that on her birthday on the twenty-first of March, when the sun sets behind the minaret of the mosque in Edirnekapi, the moon rises between two minarets in Uskyudar. Thus, Sinan immortalized the name of his secret lover, which means ""sun and moon"" in translation. In addition to the central building of the kulliye mosque, Edirnekapi included a madrasah, a hamam, a turban of the heirs of Mihrimah and a number of rented shops. Nowadays there is practically nothing left of the complex. But the mosque continues to delight local Muslims and visitors of the city with its lightness and grace even today.
Here, on one of the highest hills of Istanbul, we will finish our tour.
If you liked this walk, support the app with an assessment in the App Store, because it helps to travel much more budget-friendly and interesting, and inspires us to create new exciting routes.
Thank you for choosing an audio tour and see you in other areas of the city.