The Church of the Mother of God in Blachernae at the dawn of the Byzantine Empire was revered no less than the Hagia Sophia. Its history began at the beginning of the fifth century during the time of Empress Pulcheria, who served as regent under her younger brother Theodosius II.
For many years Pulcheria refused to believe in the assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In this connection, she asked Patriarch Juvenal of Jerusalem to open the tomb and send the most pure relics of the Virgin Mary to Constantinople. However, the Empress was given only some parts of the funeral clothes with a reproach for unbelief.
Pulcheria decided to build a temple for the shrine, next to the holy spring, where, according to legend, the Mother of God was repeatedly seen.
The wife of Theodosius II, Evdokia, presented her husband's sister with a unique icon of the Virgin Mary, brought by her from Jerusalem and, according to legend, painted by the evangelist Luke himself. She was also placed in the church in Blachernae, for which she became popularly known as Blachernae.
Later, during the reign of Emperor Leo I Makella, the brothers Galbius and Candide, who were very important dignitaries, stole the ark with the Robe of the Virgin from Jerusalem.
The emperor attached a special building to the previously existing church to store the shrine, and in honor of its transfer here he established a special feast of the Ordination of the Sacrament, which is still revered in Orthodox churches on the second of July according to the Julian calendar.
Rebuilt under Justin and Justinian, the Church of the Virgin Mary in Blachernae has become one of the most important centers of pilgrimage.
This is not surprising. After all, many miracles emanated from the shrines stored here. Patients with incurable diseases received healing, and the miraculous icon of the Hodegetria more than once defended Constantinople from enemy sieges.
So in the six hundred and twenty-sixth year, the Avars fled in fear from the city walls when they saw a woman in expensive clothes above them. According to legend, it was the Most pure Mother of God herself, who came to the rescue during the procession from the back of the wall.
The miracle was repeated during the war with the Arabs in the year seven hundred and eighteen, and with the Rus in the year eight hundred and sixty, and the Bulgarians in the year nine hundred and twenty-six. Another phenomenon of the Virgin is associated with the name of St. Andrew the fool. In the nineteen-tenth year, when the Saracens attacked Constantinople, Andrew and other parishioners prayed in the Church of the Mother of God in Blachernae.
During the service, he looked up and saw the Mother of God above him surrounded by angels and saints. She took off her maforium and spread it over the audience, protecting them from adversity. This phenomenon was perceived as a miracle, and a new feast of the Intercession of the Most Holy Theotokos appeared in the Orthodox Church. Later, the Byzantine emperors moved their palace closer to the shrines, and the Blachernae Church became a house.
But the trouble came from where she was not expected. In the seventieth year, a devastating fire almost destroyed the building. Fortunately, the miraculous icon of the Hodegetria managed to be taken out of the church in the era of iconoclasm to the neighboring Pantocrator temple. A part of the belt of the Most Holy Theotokos, which the Crusaders took to Europe in one thousand two hundred and fourth year, has also been preserved.
During the Latin Empire, the temple was forgotten, and the Palaiologos dynasty simply did not have the money to restore it.
In the one thousand four hundred and thirty-fourth year, another fire left no stone unturned from the dilapidated building. The surroundings of the spring were deserted and overgrown with grass for many years. Only in the second half of the nineteenth century a small Greek chapel was built over it, and later a small church, which can be seen today.
As for the Blachernae Icon of the Mother of God, which defended Constantinople for many years, after the arrival of the Ottomans, it was hidden on Mount Athos, and in one thousand six hundred and fifty-three it was presented as a gift to the Russian tsar Alexei Mikhailovich.
Since then, the shrine has been kept in the Assumption Cathedral of the Moscow Kremlin and often participates in church holidays and processions.