Walking along the Ataturk Boulevard, which smoothly turns into the Ataturk Bridge, it is worth saying a few words about this legendary personality. After all, he did no less for modern Turks than Mehmed II did in his time. But if Fatih expanded the state to the state of an empire, it fell to Mustafa Kemal Ataturk to create a new Turkish republic on its fragments.
The future president of the country was born in one thousand eight hundred and eightieth year in the city of Thessaloniki in the family of entrepreneur and former customs officer Ali Ryz Efendi. Since childhood, he has been distinguished by independence and a desire for leadership, while maintaining a sharp mind and a kind heart.
His middle name ""Kemal"" was given to the boy by a math teacher when he was twelve years old. Literally, it translates as ""maturity"", ""perfection"".
And indeed, Mustafa Kemal had to grow up quite early. Of the five children in the family, only two survived - Mustafa himself and his sister Makbule. His father died when the boy was barely eight. The mother remarried, and the child thoroughly distanced himself from the family, entering first a military school, and then the Academy of the General Staff.
At the dawn of his career, he proved himself as a competent military leader during the Italo-Turkish war in Libya and the Bulgarian-Turkish clashes in the Balkans. Mustafa Kemal also happened to participate in the First World War, which the Ottoman Empire shamefully lost.
This defeat allowed the allied forces of the Entente to occupy the territories of the empire and literally tear it apart. Perhaps there would be nothing left of Turkey and its people at all if it were not for Mustafa Kemal Ataturk.
Being a well-known military leader and a competent negotiator, Mustafa Kemal was able to create a revolutionary government and, with the help of the USSR, win back part of the strategically important cities for the new state.
After the expulsion of detractors from their territories, the abolition of the Sultanate, the adoption of a new Constitution and the transfer of the capital to Ankara, the first president of the new state carried out a series of reforms that changed Turkey beyond recognition.
He banned polygamy, introduced Western legal norms, the fashion for the European style, translated the Arabic alphabet into Latin, made the transition to the Gregorian calendar, separated religion from the state, created the first national bank, engaged in large-scale construction and even obliged citizens to come up with surnames according to the European model. By the way, the parliament gave Mustafa Kemal the surname ""Ataturk"", which literally means ""Father of the Nation"".
He has done a lot of good for the beautiful part of society. Under him, women received the right to study at universities, conduct business, vote and be elected to parliament.
Despite such a respectful attitude towards women, the personal life of the Turkish leader did not work out. His marriage broke up in his youth, just three years after his marriage. Mustafa had no children of his own, but there were ten foster children, eight of whom were girls. 
By the way, one of the daughters of the Turkish leader Sabiha Gokcen became the first Turkish female pilot, and one of the airports in Istanbul is named after her.