In the very center of Fatih County, in a quiet park near a busy highway, there is a monument to the great commander and ruler of the Ottoman Empire Mehmed II. He was popularly called Fatih, or the Conqueror, often comparing him with Alexander the Great.
A monument in his honor appeared in Istanbul in May of nineteen eighty-seven. The author of the sculpture Hussein Gezer depicted the Sultan galloping on a horse under the shadow of an unfinished arch. This arch symbolized the desire of the ruler to conquer the whole world by establishing Muslim culture and religion in the occupied territories.
Mehmed II was the seventh ruler of the Ottoman family, the son of Murad II and a Greek slave. Already at the age of six, he went to lead the province of Manisa, and at twelve he participated with his father in the Battle of Varna, where he distinguished himself with his bravery.
Mehmed inherited the sultan's throne at the age of fourteen. However, due to the youth of the heir, the ruling pasha persuaded Murad to return to power. Mehmed did not despair and three years later regained the throne. And at twenty-one, the young commander rode victoriously into the gates of the defeated Constantinople.
There were many more victories in the Sultan's life. During the years of his reign, the territory of the Ottoman Empire expanded almost threefold. The power of the Ottomans was established in the Balkans and in many countries of southeastern Europe.
However, Mehmed II entered history not only as a great commander, but also as a wise ruler. It was he who issued a set of laws regulating the legal, managerial and financial issues of the Ottoman Empire, which was used until the beginning of the nineteenth century.
He also laid the foundation of Istanbul University, believing that education is the key to the prosperity of any nation. The sultan paid a lot of attention to the development of culture, art, and even often wrote poetry himself.
During his reign, more than five hundred socially significant buildings were built in Constantinople: mosques, madrassas, schools, libraries and other things. At the same time, Mehmed respected the rights of followers of other religions, giving them the opportunity to practice their faith in their own churches.
Thanks to him and his descendants, Istanbul remains today a tolerant, multicultural city, which preserves the legacy of bygone times.