Even under Constantine the Great, the whole of Constantinople was surrounded by a fortress wall. From the side of the Golden Horn Bay, there were much fewer requirements for the fortifications, so they have reached our days in a rather deplorable form.
Here the Byzantines were protected by a chain stretched across the Bosphorus and a much more formidable weapon - the ""Greek fire"". It was thanks to the unusual flammable liquid that Constantinople managed to win many, often unequal, naval battles.
The mysterious mixture appeared at the disposal of the Byzantines in the second half of the seventh century, when the famous engineer Kalinnik fled from Heliopolis conquered by the Arabs to Constantinople.
For many years he worked on the invention of a combustible mixture and a special device (siphon) for throwing it. Having sharpened his grudge against the Arabs, Kalinnik offered a recipe for this mixture to the Byzantine emperor Constantine IV, when a powerful enemy fleet appeared at the walls of the city.
The combustible mixture released from the siphons of Byzantine ships burst into a bright flame when in contact with air. Moreover, it was almost impossible to extinguish it. It spread over the surface of the water and did not go out, terrifying the crews of the enemy's wooden ships.
Thanks to the ""Greek fire"", both the Arabs and the boats of Prince Igor Rurikovich fled from the walls of Constantinople in fear. The Venetian ships of the Crusaders and even the troops of Mehmed II were fired with this mixture. By the way, in the last battle, more than a hundred Ottoman ships fought against five Byzantine ships. As a result of the battle, the Turks lost about twelve thousand people.
It is not surprising that the recipe for such a formidable weapon has been kept in the strictest secret for centuries. Other nations were able to find out about him only as a result of banal betrayal.
Having lost the throne, the Byzantine emperor Alexei III Angel in the one thousand two hundred and tenth year defected to the side of the long-time enemy of the empire of the Koni Sultanate, to whom he issued a secret recipe. And already a few decades later, the Arabs, Saracens, and even Russians owned the secret.
By the fourteenth century, the combustible mixture ceased to be something amazing and gave way to much more destructive and controllable guns, and with the fall of the empire, the mysterious recipe was irretrievably lost.
For centuries, scientists and alchemists have tried to uncover the secret of the ""Greek fire"", but its true composition is not known until now.