The history of the imperial palace in Blachernae most likely began during the reign of Leo I, who expanded the church of his predecessor Pulcheria with rooms for storing the reliquary with the robe of the Most Holy Theotokos. Next to the revered shrine, the emperor added a triclinium, where his bedroom, prayer room and reception hall were located, and by the beginning of the sixth century, Leo's followers expanded the building to a small country residence.
However, the Blachernae Palace reached its greatest heyday during the reign of the Komnenos dynasty.
So Alexey I at the beginning of the twelfth century, having noticeably rebuilt the premises, already used the palace for official receptions, and his grandson Manuel | officially moved his residence here. The descendants of the dynasty repeatedly supplemented the palace with new buildings and territories so that after a few decades it occupied an area of more than two square kilometers, stretching almost to the shore of the Golden Horn.
Detached buildings with courtyards were surrounded by lush gardens, manicured paths, administrative buildings and numerous churches. It was thanks to the churches that Greek historians began to call this palace ""Golden-domed"". For the entertainment of the emperors, a circus was built next to it.
In the spring of one thousand ninety-seventh year, Emperor Alexei I received the leader of the Crusaders, Prince Bohemond of Tarentum, in his new residence. His example was followed a century later by Isaac II Angel, who invited the participants of the Fourth Crusade to an audience. They were so amazed by the luxury and richness of the decoration that they decided to plunder Constantinople.
The Latins who came to power preferred the old palace in the center of the city to the Blachernae residence. But Paleologists have returned here again.
During the reign of Michael VIII, the residence expanded even more. At the same time, this small Blachernae Palace was erected, which has been preserved in the best way to this day.
The Turks call it Tekfur-sarai or the ruler's palace. Under the Ottomans, the sultan's menagerie, a house of tolerance and a Jewish almshouse were located here. In the eighteenth century, they were replaced by workshops for the production of tiles, and at the beginning of the twentieth century, they even tried to make a factory here.
Already in our time, the palace has been noticeably ""ennobled"" with modern materials, adapting ancient spaces for a museum. Now inside there is a small exhibition of Tekfura tiles and ceramics, and from the observation deck at the top of the pavilion there is a pleasant panorama of the Golden Horn Bay and the surrounding neighborhoods.