In Byzantine times, the majestic Church of the Holy Apostles stood on the site of the Fatih Mosque. Today, only a few bricks and columns remain of it, installed in the courtyard of the mosque, but before the construction of St. Sophia, this church was considered one of the main Christian monasteries of Constantinople.
It was conceived by the Emperor Constantine in the early three hundred and thirties as a tomb for himself. It was unusual for Roman emperors to arrange burials inside city walls. But Konstantin decided to depart from the ancient custom by installing a mausoleum church on the highest point of the city.
Baths, the emperor's living quarters, rooms for the clergy and guard rooms for the guards were erected around the religious building.
Inside, right in the altar of the church, twelve sacred tables were built, on which it was planned to place the relics of all the apostles. However, in fact, only the relics of the Apostle Andrew, as well as two of the seventy followers of Jesus, St. Luke and St. Timothy, were transferred to the church.
Among the apostles, Constantine, who was not distinguished by modesty, planned to install his own sarcophagus, which was carried out during the reign of his son Constantius II.
This event marked the beginning of the tradition of burying Byzantine emperors and empresses right here, within the walls of the Church of the Holy Apostles. Moreover, this tradition lasted until the eleventh century. In addition to the rulers, there were also the relics of the patriarchs of Constantinople Nikephoros I and Methodius I, as well as Saints John Chrysostom and Gregory the Theologian.
The construction of the Hagia Sophia took away from the Church of the Holy Apostles the role of the spiritual center of the empire. Noticeably damaged after the uprising of ""Nick"", the temple was rebuilt according to a completely different plan. Besides, Justinian did not consider Constantine to be equal to the Apostles. Therefore, his sarcophagus was moved from the altar to the mausoleum built for this purpose.
The church experienced another global destruction under the Crusaders. The barbarians plundered the tombs of the emperors and took the most valuable relics, gold and precious stones to Europe.
Despite the fact that with the fall of the Latin Empire, the Byzantines tried to restore the church, its splendor and glory remained in the past. Nevertheless, when Constantinople was captured by the Ottomans, this temple still existed.
Mehmed II placed it under the jurisdiction of the Greek patriarch. However, the monastery became so dilapidated that he preferred to move to the church of the Theotokos of Pammakarista, taking with him the most valuable of the preserved relics.
It was decided to demolish the temple itself for the construction of the Fatih Mosque in its place. Moreover, no one stood on ceremony with the remaining bodies of the emperors. They were turned into powder and mixed with crushed stone, poured into the base of the foundation. All that has survived are only a few sarcophagi, now stored in the Archaeological Museum of Istanbul.