The Fatih Mosque, built on the top of the Fanar Hill, became the first major religious building of the Ottoman Constantinople. It is not difficult to guess that the construction customer was Mehmed II himself, who went down in history under the nickname the Conqueror or Fatih. It took the sultan a long seven years to build the building.
At first it was a great monument reflecting all the power and strength of the new rulers of the city.
Like other sultan mosques, Fatih was a complex of buildings. It included eight madrassas, a library, a hospital for the insane, a shelter, a market, a hamam, a caravanserai, an elementary school and a public kitchen. Later, the territory was decorated with several rather significant turbas, including one of the main shrines of Istanbul Muslims - the tomb of Mehmed the Conqueror.
And everything would be fine if not for one important ""But"". The Ottomans did not take into account the increased seismic hazard of the Constantinople hills.
A huge mosque with a single dome turned out to be very unreliable, as a result of which it was severely damaged during the earthquake of one thousand five hundred and ninth year. They did not have time to restore it, as a new series of aftershocks again covered the building with cracks, and in one thousand seven hundred and sixty-six the main shrine of Istanbul was completely formed as a house of cards.
There was nothing to restore this time. Only the mihrab, a niche for the imam of the mosque's prayer, remained intact. Therefore, they decided to rebuild the shrine in a completely different plan using new earthquake-resistant technologies.
Unfortunately, the appearance of the mosque has changed a lot. In order to imagine how it looked before, it is better to walk to Chamberlitash Square, where there is a modest Atik Ali Pasha Mosque, built in the image and likeness of the Fatih Mosque.
The modern appearance of the shrine was given by the court architect of Mustafa III, Mehmed Tahir-agha. He noticeably changed the layout of the mosque, designed five domes instead of one, and added the splendor of the Baroque style popular at that time to the decoration.
The durbee of Mehmed II and his wife Gulbahar Khatun, the library and the caravanserai were also altered. Numerous madrasahs later became the basis of Istanbul University, but the hamam, market, hospital and canteen after the destruction decided not to restore.