It is not necessary to search for ancient monuments in Istanbul for a long time. They themselves, like giants from the past, grow up in noisy squares and in a tangle of quiet streets, in the center of attention and away from the hustle and bustle of the city. Take, for example, the aqueduct of Valent, which cuts the modern Ataturk Boulevard into two parts.
This grandiose arched structure was erected in the second half of the fourth century, when the power over the Eastern Roman Empire was under the jurisdiction of the Emperor Valens.
The giant aqueduct, reaching a height of twenty-six meters, served as part of the water supply system of Constantinople and connected two peaks of neighboring hills.
It is curious that it was built from the stones of the Chalcedonian wall. While dismantling the ancient monument, the workers managed to find a strange slab on which there was an inscription saying that the emperor would die as soon as he finished construction.
Oddly enough, it turned out to be prophetic. After the completion of the work, Valens was indeed killed in the Battle of Adrianople.
The aqueduct became part of the system that delivered water from the Belgrade Forest to the Great Byzantine Palace. Drinking water flowed through the upper tier of the structure, where lead pipes were laid. Despite the fact that lead often led to fatal poisoning of the inhabitants of Constantinople, the ancient system was used for almost a millennium and a half, until the middle of the nineteenth century.
Of course, over the years of its existence, the aqueduct, which suffered from earthquakes and enemy raids, was repeatedly repaired.
The last major restoration took place during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent. It was led by the notorious Mimar Sinan, who made the aqueduct part of the system of forty city fountains near the Topkapi Palace.
Nowadays, this ancient Roman monument is a bright landmark and one of the symbols of Istanbul. The aqueduct looks especially attractive after dark, when its arches are painted with warm night lights.