The Small Blachernae Palace or the Porphyrogenite (Porphyrogenitus) Palace, as it was called earlier, is now an annex to the large Blachernae palace complex. It is the best preserved of the three Byzantine palaces and one of the few relatively intact examples of late Byzantine secular architecture in the world. The palace was built in the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century as part of the Blachernae palace complex, where the Feodosian walls connect with the later walls of the suburb of Blachernae. The name of the palace is known from the stories of the Byzantine historian Mikhail Kritovul, who described and named the palace during the Ottoman siege of Constantinople in one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year.
Although at first glance the palace is named after the tenth-century emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, it was built for so long until the thirteenth century, and was actually named after Constantine Palaiologos, the son of Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos. ""Porphyrogenite"", meaning literally ""porphyrogenitus"", meant a child born by the ruling emperor. The emperor showed the newborn heir from the balcony and declared him ""Caesar Orbi"" or ""ruler of the world"".  
The palace itself surprisingly served as a temporary abode for invaders and emperors waiting for the hour of their rule. Andronikos III remained in the palace until his grandfather abdicated. Similarly, John VI Cantacuzene remained in the palace during the negotiations on the regency of John V Palaiologos with Empress Anna of Savoy. Finally, John V Palaiologos remained in the palace, thus completing the removal of John VI Cantacuzene from power. 
But in the last years of the Byzantine Empire, the palace served as an imperial residence.
As a result, it suffered greatly due to its proximity to the outer walls during the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year. Subsequently, it was used for a variety of purposes. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, it housed part of the sultan's menagerie. The animals were moved to another location at the end of the seventeenth century, and the building was used as a brothel. Since one thousand seven hundred and nineteen, a ceramic workshop with five furnaces was created. She began to produce unique ceramic tiles, vessels, dishes, but at the same time the workshop was influenced by European designs and colors. 
It worked for about a century, after which it was closed. By the first half of the nineteenth century, the building had become an almshouse for Istanbul Jews. At the beginning of the twentieth century, it was used for some time as a bottle factory, but then it was abandoned again.  As a result, only the complex brick and stone exterior facade remained the same, remaining one of the examples of secular Byzantine architecture. In July of the two thousand tenth year, the palace underwent extensive restoration. In March, two thousand of the fifteenth year, a roof and glass windows were installed in the building. Since two thousand twenty-one, the palace has been restored and is now a museum with a finished roof, wooden floors, a new staircase and fixed windows.