The history of the monastery of Hora goes back to ancient times. A small temple on this site existed in the time of Byzantium. It towered outside the city, which is why it received the name of the Choir, translated from Greek meaning ""in the field"" or ""outside the city"". For the first time the monastery reached its heyday during the reign of Justinian, thanks to the efforts of his wife's uncle, Empress Theodora.
After visiting the holy places of Israel and Palestine, Theodore moved to Antioch, where he became known as a wise old man. Justinian ordered him to return to the capital, the Holy elder agreed, choosing a small church in the fields for the implementation of his monastic plans. Soon the brethren gathered around him, and a monastery was founded.
However, already in the five hundred and fifty-seventh year, a strong earthquake almost destroyed all the buildings. The main church of the monastery, consecrated in honor of Christ the Savior, was rebuilt with the money of Emperor Justinian. Decorated with paintings and mosaics, it has become one of the most beautiful churches in Constantinople.
But already in the following centuries the monastery fell into utter decay. The glory of the bright sights of the capital returned to him thanks to the efforts of Maria Dyka, the mother-in-law of Emperor Alexei | Komnenos. Once in the center of the aristocratic quarter, she was taken into care by members of the imperial family.
During the reign of Andronikos II, the first Minister of state and Chief Treasurer Theodore Metohit completely restored the temple, spending almost all of his fortune on monumental mosaics.
They were so perfect that they became one of the unsurpassed artistic achievements of the Byzantine era, comparable in beauty to the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican.
The Ottomans who came to power did not touch the monastery for many years. However, already in the time of Bayezid II, the sultan was informed that secret meetings of Christians seeking to overthrow the Turkish yoke were taking place here.
The Sultan ordered his vizier to stop the riots. He blocked the monastery for seven whole days, but when the janissaries got inside, the monastery turned out to be empty. All Christians managed to leave it through an underground passage.
The Sultan was so angry that he ordered the church to be taken away from the worshippers and turned into the Kahrie-jami Mosque. Luxurious mosaics were hastily covered with plaster and ochre, which helped to preserve unique works of art for posterity.
The new life of the monastery of Hora began after the establishment of the Turkish Republic, when the existing mosque, along with the Hagia Sophia, was turned into a museum. As a result of restoration work, scientists have uncovered ancient mosaics that have remained virtually intact since the beginning of the fourteenth century. These images, personifying the earthly life of Jesus, have attracted numerous tourists to the monastery of the Choir for many years.
However, already in August of the two thousand twentieth year, the ruling president of Turkey decided, following the Hagia Sophia Cathedral, to turn the Choir into a mosque and monastery again. However, now the frescoes were not covered up, but simply covered with drywall.