Both at the entrance to St. George's Cathedral and in its interiors, you can find an image of a double-headed eagle, which is currently a symbol of the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
This image is often associated with the Byzantine Empire, but its roots are much more ancient. The first images of the mythical creature appeared on the cylindrical seals of the Hittite kingdom already in the thirteenth century before our era. Then the ancient sign was adopted by the Sumerians, Babylonians, Hindus and later peoples of the Middle East and Asia Minor.
For Byzantium, the concept of a coat of arms was an uncharacteristic phenomenon. It penetrated into the culture of the country only after the Fourth Crusade, when the power of the Latin Empire was established in Constantinople.
The double-headed eagle was used as a dynastic symbol by the first representative of the Palaiologos dynasty, Emperor Michael VIII.
Eagles symbolized secular power and were depicted on the clothes of emperors. By the way, it was they, embroidered on red boots, that helped the Ottomans to identify the last Byzantine emperor in the war killed during the capture of Constantinople.
Later, thanks to the heirs of the dynasty, the image of the double-headed eagle penetrated into other European countries, one way or another connected either with Byzantium or with the Paleologians. In particular, Konstantin XI's niece Sophia Palaiologos, who became the wife of Prince Ivan III of Moscow, brought the Byzantine coat of arms to Russia.
But let's return to the Patriarchate of Constantinople. Strangely enough, the double-headed eagle became a symbol of ecclesiastical power only after the fall of the Byzantine Empire in one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year, and it happened by the will of the conquerors.
Patriarch Gennady Scholarius, who received ecclesiastical authority, was appointed by Mehmed II not only the primate of the church, but also the head of the Christian community of the empire (ethnarch). This gave him the right to adopt some elements of the Byzantine imperial symbolism. So the mitre became similar to the crown of the Paleologians, and the omophorion more resembled an embroidered imperial belt.
The same thing happened with the double-headed eagle, which has since been considered a sign of not secular, but spiritual power. They began to depict him on the flags of the patriarchate, decorate the episcopal thrones, high places and church gates in the temples of the empire. Even today, the eagle remains a sign of spiritual sovereignty. His image can be found in almost all Eastern churches, including Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.