The legendary and mighty walls surrounding the city are still able to plunge into the distant times when everything was just beginning. Now we can see that the length of the Theodosian wall is almost five kilometers. It begins on the shores of the Golden Horn, near the Blachernae Palace, and continues south to the Golden Gate, included in the new wall, and the Sea of Marmara.
It all started with the fact that the first city fortifications were built in the eighth century BC, when the city was founded by the Greeks. The city was called Byzantium, but at that time it contained only a small acropolis. Despite this, the location of the city was considered vital for trade, and therefore the city began to grow in size over the years, and in the meantime the walls surrounding the city were added and grew.
Later, the walls of Constantinople were built by Constantine the Great, and initially they surrounded the entire city from all sides. The walls were designed to protect this strategically located city not only from land invasion, but also from the sea. On the eleventh of May, three hundred and thirtieth, Constantine officially moved the capital of the Roman Empire to Byzantium. The city gradually expanded along the borders. The wall was also expanded again, but at that time it was only one wall, with towers located at strategic points.
The original wall stood until the end of the Byzantine era, until it was replaced by the famous Feodosian walls.
Time passed. The city continued to grow and develop. But it was the capture of Rome by the Visigoths in the four hundred and tenth year that forced the Byzantine government to build the fourth wall, which was called the Theodosian Wall. It was about one kilometer from the wall of Constantine. It must be admitted that Emperor Theodosius II cannot take credit for its construction. The man who was responsible for the construction was his praetorian prefect, Procopius Antemius, who was an outstanding ruler of the eastern part of the Roman world when Theodosius was still a boy. The wall was built in the four hundred and twelfth-four hundred and fourteenth years. Its total area was twelve square kilometers, the height reached up to twelve meters, and the wall also had ninety-six towers about eighteen meters high.
In the four hundred and forty-seventh year, the walls were partially destroyed by an earthquake, which was especially alarming because the Huns were making aggressive raids by that time. Theodosius ordered the praetorian prefect Cyrus of Panopolis to restore and strengthen the walls. A second wall about eight meters high was built in front of the original wall, and the number of towers was doubled, so now we can see one hundred and ninety-two towers. The last addition was the wall around the palace of Blachernae, hastily built before the Avars besieged Constantinople in the six hundred and twenty-seventh year.
The walls protected the city from various sieges, but a series of cannon shots passed through the walls in one thousand four hundred and fifty-three, and Constantinople passed to the Ottomans.
But the Ottomans installed and maintained the walls, expanding them as the city grew during this rich period of time.
Today you can see large sections of the original walls, some of which date back to the Byzantine era, despite the fact that restoration work has continued over the past two decades.