Standing on the shore of the Golden Horn, the monumental Church of St. Stephen is considered one of the unique structures not only of Istanbul, but also of the whole world, since it was built entirely of iron.
A small Bulgarian community has lived in Ottoman Constantinople for centuries. Religiously, they were subordinate to the Patriarchate of Constantinople. But by the nineteenth century there were so many Bulgarians that they began to grumble because of the Greek language, in which all church services were held.
Representatives of the community asked the ruling Sultan Abdul-Aziz to issue a firman, according to which Bulgarians were recognized as a separate ethnic group and had the right to erect their own church.
The first building of the church, more like a wooden house, was donated to the worshippers by the famous Moldavian Phanariot of Bulgarian origin, Prince Stefan Bogoridi. Perhaps that is why the new church was consecrated in honor of St. Stephen, the patron saint of the patron.
At the end of the nineteenth century, a fire destroyed a wooden building, and in its place they decided to build a much more thorough one. But Hovsep Aznavyr, an architect of Armenian origin who worked on the project, was afraid to use a concrete structure on the unstable shores of the Golden Horn. And a brilliant idea came to his head to lighten the building at the expense of cast iron and iron.
The structures with a total weight of five hundred tons were made in Vienna in one thousand eight hundred and ninety-five. Then they were sent by rail to Trieste, and from there they were delivered to Constantinople. The installation took another six months: at least four million rivets and bolts were used to connect the elements.
In Vienna, they also made an elegant interior in the Neo-Gothic style with Baroque elements. Yes, but the ruling Bulgarian exarch did not like that the icons were painted in the Catholic style. As a result, the lord's secretary went to Russia to look for a company that would make an Orthodox iconostasis.
The Moscow workshop of Nikolai Okhapkin was chosen as the performer, the icons for the church were painted by the Russian artist Claudius Lebedev, and six bells were cast in Yaroslavl at the factory of Peter Olovyanishnikov. Two of them sound over Istanbul neighborhoods today. The solemn consecration of the church took place in one thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight. Only it didn't take long to be the main cathedral of the Bulgarian community of St. Stephen's Church. In nineteen hundred and twelve, it was closed and returned to the faithful only a hundred years later after a major restoration. Nowadays it is again open to all worshippers.