Walking around the Fatih district, there are often remnants of ancient city walls. From the side of the Golden Horn, they were preserved only in fragments, since they almost never carried serious defensive functions, but on land, fortifications were needed much more thoroughly.
Prefect Anthimius was engaged in their construction at the beginning of the fifth century, when Theodosius II ruled the country, for which these walls are often called Theodosian. The length of the land wall stretching from the Sea of Marmara to the Golden Horn was five thousand six hundred and thirty meters. These were impressive fortifications that reliably protected the city from barbarians.
Three hundred and fifty years later, a powerful earthquake caused significant damage to the ancient building, but the Byzantines managed to restore the fortification in just sixty days. At the same time, two rings of fortifications were supplemented with a moat with water.
Immediately behind the moat, the enemies were met by a five-meter wall, followed by a much more impressive structure fifteen meters high and five meters thick. The walls went ten to fifteen meters deep into the ground, which excluded the possibility of a tunnel.
Towers were installed around the perimeter, of which there were about a hundred pieces in the outer wall alone. Some of them had exclusively military functions, while the other allowed local residents to get to neighboring villages.
In the event of a siege, all pedestrian bridges were dismantled or burned, the gates were sealed tightly, and Constantinople turned into an impregnable island.
Later dynasties repeatedly expanded and strengthened the ancient walls. They were most powerful here, in Blachernae, where the Imperial Palace was located for many years. Here the fortifications were in four rows, the highest of which reached twenty meters.
Thanks to such reliable protection, Constantinople remained too tough for the invaders for centuries.
The capture of the city by the Crusaders in one thousand two hundred and fourth year occurred only as a result of the fact that they were able to break into the Golden Horn Bay, and the defenders of the modest walls on that side simply capitulated. But only Mehmed II managed to break through the defense from the west in one thousand four hundred and fifty-third year. However, we will tell this story in more detail later.
Let's just say about the gate near which you are now. They are located in the wall of Manuel Komnenos, erected in the middle of the twelfth century, and are called Caligari. According to one version, it was here that the Byzantine Emperor Constantine XI was last seen alive, together with his soldiers defending the city from the hordes of Ottomans.
At the end of the last century, the pretty dilapidated Feodosiya wall was partially restored with the assistance of UNESCO. However, they did it quite superficially, as a result of which it was these areas that were most severely affected by the recent earthquakes.