It will take a lot of sweat to climb the hill where the little red church of Mary of Mongolia stands, which local Muslims often call the ""bloody"" temple. What does Mongols and blood have to do with it? There is an opinion that already in the seventh century there was a convent on the site of the future church, founded by the holy virgins of Constantinople Eustolia and Sosipatra.
In the eleventh century, Athos monks built a men's monastery nearby in the name of all saints. However, with the arrival of the Latins, the male monastery was destroyed, and the female one was pretty dilapidated.
Only a miracle could save him. And this miracle was the illegitimate daughter of the Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII of the Palaiologos dynasty, Maria. In one thousand two hundred and sixty-fifth year, Maria was betrothed to Genghis Khan's grandson, the Mongolian Khan Hulagu. However, while the bride was getting to the wedding place, the khan died, and according to Mongolian laws, his son, Ilkhan Abaka, took her to wife.
As a result of this dynastic marriage, Abaka adopted the Christian faith, but this did not prevent him from having ten wives and experiencing a strong weakness for alcohol. It was delirium tremens caused by alcohol addiction that led Ilkhan to his death.
After the death of her husband, Maria returned to Constantinople with her daughter and decided to restore the convent of the Theotokos Panagiotissa. Here, at her behest, a new temple was built, which the people began to call the Church of Mary of Mongolia.
The temple received its second name ""Bloody"" after the capture of the city by the Ottomans. They say that it was near him that the fiercest street battle took place, as a result of which the Turks lost about a thousand valiant soldiers killed.
Later, the Greek architect Christodoul, who took an active part in the construction of the Fatih Mosque, beat out a letter of protection from Sultan Mehmed II in defense of this church.
Thanks to the document, a copy of which is still hanging on the wall inside, this temple has never been converted into a mosque. Therefore, from Byzantine times to the present day, Orthodox divine liturgies are regularly held here.