The Aqueduct of Valens is the next stop on our journey. It is an ancient part of the water supply system of Istanbul. And it is also one of the largest structures in this wonderful city. It should be noted that now this outstanding structure is an overpass consisting of two tiers. According to the latest data, the total length of the aqueduct is nine hundred and seventy-one meters, and the maximum height reaches up to twenty-eight meters. Initially, the structure of the aqueduct was absolutely straight, but during the construction of the Fatih Mosque it was made curved in place of the sanctuary. The masonry is uneven, the bricks alternate with cedar wood blocks. The first row of the arch was laid out of square blocks, the upper row was made of alternating materials reinforced with iron brackets. For one of these reasons, its width varies along the entire length of the bridge and ranges from seven whole seventy-five hundredths to eight whole twenty-four hundredths meters. 
Aqueducts first appeared in the second century, at that time the Emperor Hadrian was in power. The geographical location of the city did not allow residents to find fresh water sources nearby and it was necessary to deliver water from the mainland, so the active construction of aqueducts began, providing the city with clean drinking water from the Belgrade forest. But, unfortunately, the aqueduct located at this place has fallen into disrepair over the years and has lost its functionality. And so, in the three hundred and sixty-eighth year, on the initiative of Emperor Valens, a completely new six-hundred-meter aqueduct was built on the site of Hadrian's aqueduct, named after its creator. The water supply system was designed and launched very quickly, but it continued to be built and improved for another ten years.
Curiously, Prefect Clearh controlled the entire process of work. When the workers gradually removed the stones from the wall, they found an unusual slab on which it was written that the emperor's life would end at the moment when the work on the modernization of the water supply system would end. The most interesting thing is that the prediction was prophetic. When the water supply was established, Valens was killed in a battle with the Goths in Adrianople.
When the ruler Theodosius I the Great came to power in the three hundred and eightieth year, he ordered a major reconstruction of the aqueduct of Valens, which by that time had been severely damaged by an earthquake. Later, the aqueduct was also repaired by the emperors Justinian I and Justinian II. About eight hundred meters from the kilometer system have been preserved to this day. 
When Constantinople submitted to the Ottomans, the Turkish conquerors also engaged in the restoration of the aqueduct and the repair of aqueducts, including the Valenta. Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent began repairing the water supply system. Sultan Mustafa continued the work of the great ancestor in one thousand six hundred and ninety-six-one thousand six hundred and ninety-seven years. Turkish workers copied the technology invented by the Byzantines. Thanks to the efforts of the Turkish conquerors, the water supply system of Istanbul regularly served the city until the end of the nineteenth century.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, part of the foundation located near the Fatih Jami Mosque was demolished, but by the end of the century they were restored on the initiative of UNESCO.