A small church hidden behind a high fence is not listed in any guidebook. And to find it, if you don't know what to look for, is quite difficult. Many travelers even turn to the surrounding shops so that the locals show the entrance.
Nevertheless, this place deserves special attention. According to legend, in the middle of the eighteenth century there was a house with a garden, which was bought by some Greek. One night, the Virgin Mary appeared to the owner's daughter in a dream, who informed the girl that she would find a healing spring in the garden, and the next morning the family found it.
The faithful spouses thanked the Mother of God for the miracle and decided to build a small church over the spring with their modest savings. It was called the Church of the Virgin Mary or the Church of the Healing Spring.
And this church would have remained a simple Christian church, if not for one ""but"". There was a rumor among the people that the icons inside are able to fulfill desires. Yes, only this miracle works only twelve days a year, on the first of every month.
Hence, the church has new names: the church of One Day, the Church of Fulfillment of Desires and the church of Keys.
Why keys? Because in order to fulfill what you want, you need to perform a whole ritual: buy a key, a candle and a figurine personifying a desire at the entrance, approach the silver icon under glass and, pronouncing the desire, symbolically turn the key three times into any of the wells under it, as if opening church salaries. After that, you need to go down to the basement to the spring and drink healing water.
Finally, it remains in the annex next to the church to put a candle and, taking the key and the wish figurine, go home to wait for God's blessing. Well, when the wish is fulfilled, you need to return the key to the church with gratitude and treat the parishioners with something sweet.
It is curious that not only Christians come here to fulfill their wishes, but also Jews, Muslims and even the most avid atheists. Moreover, there are so many willing that on the day of ""x"" you can defend a solid queue.
The first of January is considered to be a particularly strong day for wishes. They say that up to three thousand keys can be dispersed here on this day. However, parishioners with their requests can be found here on other days of the year, when it is much quieter here.