At the very border of the Phanar district, behind a high wall surrounded by wooden buildings, the modest Cathedral of St. George is hidden - the current residence of the Patriarch of Constantinople. In general, the Patriarchate of Constantinople has played a leading role throughout the Christian world for centuries. According to legend, its origins were laid by the Apostle Andrew the First-Called, who ordained his disciple Stachy as the first bishop of Byzantium around the thirty-eighth year.
Constantine the Great not only strengthened the Christian faith, but also introduced the tradition of holding Ecumenical Councils in Byzantium. On the fourth of them, in the four hundred and fifty-first year, the dignity of the Patriarch of Constantinople was officially approved, which still exists today.
For centuries Constantinople expanded the sphere of its religious influence. It was from here that the Christian faith in Kievan Rus came. In the ninth century, Prince Askold of Kiev was baptized, and a hundred years later, Princess Olga visited the patriarch, whose grandson Vladimir the Great baptized the whole of Russia.
Mehmed II, who seized the city, did not liquidate the structure of the Patriarchate of Constantinople established centuries ago. On the contrary, he ordered the election of a new patriarch to replace the one who died in battle. The first ruler in the time of the Ottomans was Gennady Scholarius.
Mehmed II also preserved many Christian churches, having designated the Cathedral of the Holy Apostles as the residence of His Eminence. However, before the sultan had even passed away, Gennady Scholarius begged him to move the patriarchal residence from the dilapidated church of the Holy Apostles to the Christian quarter of Phanar, where the monastery of Our Lady of Joy towered on top of the hill.
However, the prosperity of the Patriarchate of Constantinople grew so rapidly that Sultan Bayezid II already undertook the first persecution of clerics. All the expensive jewelry was removed from the monastery, and the Christian cross was removed from the bell tower of the temple. Sultan Murad III completely took away the Church of Our Lady of Joy from the Orthodox, converting it into the Fethiye-jami mosque.
In one thousand six hundred and the first year, Patriarch Matthew II moved his residence to the Church of St. George, built shortly before that. By the way, the money for the construction of this temple was allocated to his predecessor Jeremiah II by the Russian tsar Fyodor Ioannovich, after he ordained the first patriarch of Moscow and All Russia, St. Job, in Moscow.
Until the eighteen-forties, St. George's Cathedral looked even more modest. This was explained by the fact that Ottoman laws forbade lavishly decorating temples of other faiths. Numerous earthquakes, fires and religious conflicts led to the fact that the cathedral was repeatedly destroyed and rebuilt again. Its final appearance was formed only at the end of the last century.
Nevertheless, behind the seemingly unassuming facade hides an ornate interior, in which many Christian shrines have been preserved.
The most valuable part is considered to be the flagellation pillar with the remains of the ring, to which, according to legend, Christ was tied before the crucifixion. This column moved to St. George's Cathedral from the Church of the Holy Apostles.
Icons of the Mother of God and John the Baptist of the eleventh-fourteenth centuries moved from the former church of the Theotokos Rejoicing to the new church. Here it was also possible to preserve the relics of Saints Euphemia, Solomonia and Queen Theophania. And in the two thousand and fourth year, the cathedral was replenished with the ark returned from Rome with the relics of John Chrysostom, Gregory the Theologian and Basil the Great, which the Crusaders took out of the city in the one thousand two hundred and fourth year.