The modern Istanbul district of Fatih is so huge that it occupies the entire territory of the Byzantine Constantinople within the city walls.

In the excursion “Istanbul in 1 day" you could already have time to get acquainted with the most important historical sights of the city center. Today You will go to the western part of the district, which is a completely different Istanbul, which eludes most tourists.

There are also many Byzantine antiquities preserved here, which are included in the list of the world heritage of mankind. In addition, it is here that The residence of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, which has been playing a leading role in the religious arena of the Christian world for thousands of years.

Your walk will begin at the Vezneciler metro station, one of the deepest stations of the Istanbul subway, and will end at the top of the sixth Constantinople hill, in the very place where the first Sultan of Constantinople victoriously entered the defeated city.

A grand aqueduct awaits you on this route Valenta, the secret church of One day, where, according to legends, the most cherished desires are fulfilled, colorful semts of Balat and Fanar, which are often They are called the Istanbul Montmartre, the palace of the Byzantine emperors in Blachernae and the colossal walls of ancient Constantinople.

You will learn the story of the fall of the Great City, why the temple of Mary of Mongolia is called bloody, from where the iron church and many other amazing stories related to these places came from in Constantinople.

The length of the route is approximately 7 kilometers, and we recommend that you allocate at least half a day for it. Be sure to stock up on comfortable shoes, as the terrain here is quite hilly.

In total, 36 objects are marked on the audio guide map, and the numbers of the dots indicate the sequence in which it is best to organize the passage of the route.

You can listen to the first 5 points of the tour for free, but to open access to all the objects, purchase the full version.

This tiny investment will help you not only significantly save on guides and excursions, but to see and learn much more than 95% of travelers manage. In addition, you will be able to use all the functions of the application without spending on mobile roaming traffic.

To go directly to the tour, click the "Start" button, and discover the other side not a fancy Istanbul.
