It is hardly possible to see the harem of the Topkapi Palace behind the high wall, but it is worth telling about it in more detail.
It was another state within a state: with its own traditions and laws.
The huge complex, consisting of four hundred rooms, could accommodate up to one thousand two hundred people at a time. In addition to the Sultan's wives, concubines and slaves, his unmarried sisters, heirs and mother lived here.
Despite the apparent confusion, there was a strict hierarchy in the harem, which was headed by the mother of the reigning sovereign, the Valide Sultan. She decided literally everything: from choosing a wife for her son to appointing a new maid.
Kyzlyar-agha, the chief of the black eunuchs, had no less power.
Only he could appear in the ruler's chambers at any time of the day or night, served as a personal courier in the sultan's relations with the vizier and mother, and also remained the only intermediary between the harem and the rest of the Topkapi palace.
There were about six hundred eunuchs subordinate to the kyzlyar-aga, who guarded women from the outside world and the intrigues of rivals. In order for eunuchs not to dare to enter into an intimate relationship with concubines, they were all castrated in childhood.
As for women, there was a certain hierarchy here as well.
New girls got into the harem at the age of five or seven. As a rule, they were bought at slave markets or received as a gift from their own parents. It was profitable for poor families to give their daughter to the harem, because from now on she belonged to the sultan, which means she lived in luxury until the end of her days.
After a long training, twelve of the most beautiful girls were sent to serve the sultan. If one of them managed to interest the ruler, the slave became a concubine. And the most talented of them, who gave the sultan heirs, could become the ruler's wife. 
Moreover, the sultan could have only four wives, but there were as many concubines as he wanted.
Often wives enjoyed no less power than the Valide Sultan. Haseki-sultan or his beloved wife had a particularly strong influence.
To reach such a high level, women went to great lengths, so intrigues and conspiracies have always flourished in the harem.
If the sultan did not pay attention to the concubine for nine years, she could receive freedom and a dowry. Sometimes the ruler even helped the girls to get married profitably.
By the way, beloved wives who gave birth only to girls always had a choice: to remarry or leave with the sultan's mother to the old palace.
If the beloved wife gave birth to an heir to the deceased sultan, she had the right to live in the harem always, but if the sultan lost the throne during his lifetime, all his women went to another palace.