Hagia Sophia is the greatest monument of Byzantine architecture. Until the construction of St. Peter's Cathedral in Rome, for almost a thousand years, this temple remained the most grandiose structure in the Christian world.
Its history began in the fourth century under the Emperor Constantine, who erected a small sanctuary on this site. By the way, Sofia is translated from Greek as Wisdom, therefore, like the church of St. Irene, the temple was not dedicated to any particular woman.
At first, Hagia Sophia did not play the role of the main church. Several times it was destroyed by fires and popular riots that broke out. One of them occurred in the five hundred and thirty-second year, when Constantinople was engulfed by a large-scale uprising of ""Nick"".
Having won the victory, Emperor Justinian, in gratitude to the higher powers, decided to erect on the site of the old church ""such a temple as has not been since the time of Adam and which will never be."" It is said that the project of Hagia Sophia appeared to the ruler in a dream.
The best architects of that time were invited to the construction: Anthemia from Thrall and Isidore from Miletus, and almost ten thousand people worked under them. Justinian himself often visited the construction site.
All estates of the then Byzantine Empire had to donate money for the construction of the temple.
It is said that the construction of Hagia Sophia took a three-year annual budget of the entire empire, and the richness of the decoration amazed contemporaries with its greatness.
On the day of the consecration of the temple, Justinian ran into the center of the cathedral and, raising his hands to the sky, said: ""Thank God who gave me the opportunity to finish this building. Oh, Solomon! I have surpassed you!""
The cathedral really turned out great. It is not for nothing that the ambassadors of Prince Vladimir, having heard angelic singing here, convinced him to accept the Christian faith.
Unfortunately, over the centuries, Hagia Sophia has repeatedly suffered from destruction and was rebuilt. She survived several earthquakes, iconoclastic emperors, an attack by crusaders, as a result of which the shroud of the deceased Christ was taken out.
For some time, Hagia Sophia was the main Catholic cathedral of the Latin Empire, and with the arrival in Constantinople, Osman turned into a mosque altogether. 
Inspired Turks plundered both the city and the temple, killing ten thousand people who gathered within its walls for the last service. Three days later, Muslim prayers were already being sung under the giant dome.
Later, two minarets and two buttresses were added to the church, Byzantine mosaics were plastered over, and Arabic script was applied to the walls. The temple underwent minor alterations under Bayezid II, Selim II, Murad III, and Ahmed III.
In the nineteenth century, Abdul-Majid restored the temple. Plaster knocked off the walls exposed Byzantine frescoes. The Sultan decided not to hide them anymore, but only to gild them slightly.
This significantly facilitated the work of restorers in nineteen thirty-five, when Turkish President Mustafa Kemal Ataturk turned St. Sophia into a museum. But eight decades later, the former main temple of the Christian world and a UNESCO World Heritage Site has again become a mosque.