The Church of St. Irene is one of the oldest Byzantine attractions in Istanbul, but despite the name, it has nothing to do with any Irene. Translated from Greek, "And Cua Irini" (n Beia eipnvn) means the Divine world. Emperor Constantine the Great dedicated the main church of Constantinople to peace.
Built at the beginning of the fourth century on the ruins of the ancient temple of Aphrodite, until the construction of Hagia Sophia, Ayia Irini played the role of the main patriarchal temple of Constantinople. It was here in the three hundred and eighty-first year that the Second Ecumenical Council was held, at which the apostolic doctrine of the Holy Trinity was approved.
Nevertheless, despite the name, the church was not very lucky with the world. Already in the three hundred and forty-sixth year there was a clash of Orthodox and Arians, as a result of which more than three thousand people died, and in the five hundred and thirty-second, after a fight of sports fans at the hippodrome, an incredibly destructive uprising of "Nick" broke out, which ended with thirty-five thousand killed and the destruction of almost half of Constantinople, including the main Christian church.
Of course, Emperor Justinian hastily restored the shrine, however, already in new architectural forms. Ayia Irini survived the era of iconoclasm, and several devastating earthquakes, and the times of Turkish looting and looting.
By the way, the Ottomans, oddly enough, did not cause much damage to the buildings. It has never been turned into a mosque and was never thought to be destroyed.
Already under Mehmed the Conqueror, the Christian church was turned into an Arsenal, and a few centuries later, Ayia Irini became the first Ottoman museum of archaeology.
After the construction of the new museum building, the church housed a rich collection of Ottoman weapons, and today the temple has been converted into a concert venue, where an international music festival is held annually.
For a millennium and a half, the first Church of Constantinople has seen a lot, but despite significant destruction and global restructuring, the bright, spacious atrium has survived unchanged to this day. A cross in the apse and fragments of mosaic images have also been preserved since the eighth century.