Suleymaniye is one of the most beautiful mosques in Istanbul. It was built in the one thousand five hundred and fifties by order of Suleiman the Magnificent, and the sultan entrusted the most famous architect and architect of the Ottoman Empire, Mimar Sinan, to erect a bright pearl of the East.
Knowing about frequent earthquakes, Sinan noticeably strengthened the seven-meter foundation and filled it with water. Only these preparatory works took a long three years.
Such sluggishness angered the ruling sultan terribly. Suleiman wanted to interrupt the construction altogether, sending Sinan to execution. But chance intervened.
The Iranian Shah Tahmasp, having learned that the work was suspended, sent the sultan a casket with precious stones.
In the casket there was also a letter in which the shah wrote that he had heard rumors that Suleiman did not have enough strength to complete the mosque. And he is ready to give him these stones, if only he would finish what he started.
Suleiman took this act as a mockery, saying that ordinary stones from quarries cost him more than the ""glass pieces"" sent by the shah. Nevertheless, pride did not allow me to quit what I started after such a gesture. As a result, the sultan handed the casket to the architect, who decorated one of the minarets of the mosque with them.
Inside, Suleymania is filled with a huge amount of light and is known for its extraordinary acoustics. Sinan managed to achieve this effect by embedding special resonator jars into the walls.
Another funny case is connected with acoustics. Rumors began to reach Suleiman that his architect had abandoned the construction site and was sitting in the middle of the mosque all day smoking a hookah. The Sultan wished to investigate the incident personally.
When Suleiman arrived at the mosque, Mimar Sinan was actually sitting on the floor with a hookah in his hands. But there was no smell of tobacco there. It turned out that water was bubbling inside. So the architect checked the quality of the acoustics being created. Suleiman liked it, and he allowed the architect to continue what he had begun.
Seven years after the start of work, the grandiose temple was finally completed. At its opening, Mimar Sinan uttered the sacred phrase: ""This mosque will stand forever!"" And time has shown that he was not mistaken.
Having survived about a hundred aftershocks and a devastating fire, the mosque was practically not damaged. Four and a half centuries later, it looks the same as when it was built.
A huge religious complex is located around the mosque, comparable in size to an entire city block. A madrasah, a school, a kitchen, a library, a hospital, a hamam, an observatory, a caravanserai and other buildings have grown on its territory.
In the courtyard of the mosque there is a cemetery and several mausoleums, where Suleiman himself, his beloved wife Hurrem (Roksolana) and daughter Mihrimah, as well as architect Mimar Sinan, who noticeably outlived his patron, are buried.