Istanbul is a city with incredible energy, a long and complicated history. For two and a half millennia, it was dominated by the Greeks, Romans, Byzantines and Ottomans, managed to visit the capital of four empires and absorb the spirit of three religions.

There are so many attractions of various historical eras located on its vast territory that you can come back here again and again, each time looking for something new and interesting for yourself.

The route of this audio tour takes you through the historical district of Fatih, where the heart of Ancient Constantinople once beat, and today most of the most recognizable Byzantine, Roman and Ottoman sights of the city are concentrated.

Your walk will start at Sirkeci Station, where the legendary Orient Express train was the terminus, and will end at Yen-Jami Square at Galata Bridge, where the route of our second tour of the city center adjoins.

You will see the grandiose Hagia Sophia and the huge Topkapi Palace, the amazing Blue Mosque and Sultanahmet Square, find out where the giant palace of the Byzantine Emperors was located and admire what has been preserved from the Constantinople Hippodrome.

You will find the Egyptian and Grand Bazaars, the mysterious Basilica Cistern, the delightful Suleymaniye Mosque, and many other iconic sights of the city, as well as related facts, legends and stories of people who once stood at the head of powerful empires.

The total length of the route is about six kilometers. Depending on the speed of walking and visiting mosques and museums, it will take you from a few hours to a full day to get acquainted with the historical center of Istanbul.

In total, fifty objects are marked on the audio guide map, and their numbering suggests the sequence in which it is best to organize the passage of the route.

The first few points are available for free, but to open access to all objects, purchase the full version.

This tiny investment will help you not only to save significantly on guides and excursions, but to see and learn much more than ninety-five percent of travelers manage. In addition, you will be able to use all the functions of the application without spending on mobile roaming traffic.

To go directly to the route, click the "Start" button, and discover the most historic and colorful area of Istanbul!
