Topkapi Palace is one of the most popular attractions in the center of Istanbul. Located on a high promontory at the confluence of the Golden Horn into the Bosphorus Strait, this palace served as the main residence of the rulers of the Ottoman Empire for almost four hundred years.
The territory of Topkapi is incredibly huge. With all the adjacent gardens and outbuildings, it occupies more than seven hundred thousand square meters, which is about twice the size of the territory of the Vatican.
During its heyday, up to four thousand people lived in the palace, and fifty thousand soldiers guarded it. No wonder the locals called it a city within a city.
The history of the complex began after the capture of Constantinople by Mehmed the Conqueror. At first, the sultan lived in the area of the modern Bayezid Square, but already in one thousand four hundred and seventy-five, a new Topkapi residence began to be built for him.
Mehmed adapted the palace for working needs, and only half a century later the ruling elite of the Ottoman Empire began to use it for living, constantly expanding, decorating and adding new functions.
In addition to the sultan's chambers proper, the residence housed a library, government offices, a school for senior officials, a mosque, an arsenal, a huge kitchen, a harem, a treasury with untold riches and many other buildings.
In one thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, Sultan Abdul-Majid, tired of medieval interiors and the bloody past, moved to a new residence, built in the European manner, Dolmabahce. However, there was still a harem in Topkapi, as well as official receptions and meetings.
Only after the fall of the Ottoman Empire, the leader of the Turkish revolution, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, turned the Topkapi Palace into a museum and opened it to the general public.
Despite the fact that only a small part of the complex is accessible to tourists, you can easily spend a whole day exploring it, and you will need to purchase a separate ticket to visit. Therefore, in our sightseeing tour of the center of Istanbul, we will consider only the most interesting of those buildings of the palace, which you can see for free.