If, standing on the cape Sarayburnu, look into the distance, it will not be difficult to see the Maiden Tower rising from the waters of the Bosphorus near the Asian coast.
The history of this building began in ancient times. There is an opinion that the Athenians began to use this island for the first time after the victory over the Spartans in the fifth century before our era. They set up a customs office on an inconspicuous piece of land to collect tribute from passing ships. Whether this office was like a tower, history is silent.
The first observation and watchtower appeared here in the time of Constantine the Great. It not only served as a beacon, but also allowed the chain to be stretched across the Bosphorus in case of a military threat to the city.
Mehmed's troops razed the Constantinople tower to the ground, but soon erected a wooden lighthouse in its place. Isolated from the outside world, it was periodically used both as a prison for courtiers sentenced to death, and as a quarantine isolation ward for cholera patients.
But after the fire of one thousand seven hundred and twentieth year, only memories remained of the lighthouse, and the ruling vizier Damat Ibrahim Pasha rebuilt it in stone.
Nowadays, a very pretentious restaurant with an open observation deck is located at the top of the tower.
As for the name "Maiden", several legends are associated with it.
The first of them tells about the sultan's daughter, who, even before birth, was predicted to die from a snake bite on the day when she would meet her lover. To save his heiress, the sultan built for her a magnificent palace with a tower where no human foot had ever set foot.
For many years, the beautiful Mihir-Shikhil grew up in her small castle, not knowing sadness. But by the age of majority, the orphanage began to weigh on her.
Only the Persian prince, who tamed the princess's beloved pigeon, was able to dispel the sadness of the young maiden.
On one of the beautiful days, Mihir-Shikhil asked her father for an unusual gullinek flower to brighten up her painful days.
Prince Rammal's mentor helped Sultan find the flower, He also persuaded his father to give the flower to his daughter to the virgin.
It is not difficult to guess that a prince in love was actually hiding behind women's clothes. But as soon as the young man only approached the virgin, a snake crawled out of his basket and stung the beauty to death.
Another well-known legend is much more ancient. She sends us back to Antiquity, when the ardent youngster Leander fell in love with the priestess of the temple of Artemis Hero. The couple had to meet secretly and on rare nights Hero lit a lantern on the tower for Leander. Seeing the wonderful light, the young man swam across the Bosphorus to meet his beloved.
But one day a strong storm extinguished the light and, exhausted, Leander drowned in the choppy waters of the strait. Saddened by grief, Hero jumped into the waters of the Bosphorus from a high tower on the same day.
Since then, this tower is often called Leandra, and in memory of the legend, every summer the Turkish Olympic Committee organizes an intercontinental swim across the Bosphorus, gathering athletes and ordinary daredevils from all over the world.