At the southwestern wall of Hagia Sophia is the territory of the Sultan's tombs, where five Ottoman rulers and their family members are buried.
Up to Suleiman the Magnificent, each sultan built his own mosque, where he was buried, but already Suleiman's son, Selim II, who was popularly nicknamed the Drunkard, was awarded a turban in the territory of Hagia Sophia.
In addition to the Sultan himself, his beloved wife Afife Nurbanu-Sultan, as well as five daughters and seventeen sons, strangled by order of Sultan Murad III, are buried in the tomb.
Murad himself found his last refuge in a nearby turban next to his wives and children in the number of thirty-two people. Moreover, only the closest ones were put in the sultan's tomb. The loving Murad III, who had a total of one hundred and three children. The concubines' children were strangled and dumped into the Bosporus after their father's death.
There is also the mausoleum of Ahmed III, the Mausoleum of Princes, as well as the baptistery, where Christians were baptized in Byzantine times, and during the Ottoman Empire, the insane Mustafa and his nephew Sultan Ibrahim were buried.
The tradition of getting rid of brothers upon accession to the throne was legalized in the Ottoman Empire during the reign of Mehmed the Conqueror. As a result, sixty crown princes were strangled in the Ottoman Empire during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The custom was officially abandoned only after Ahmed's death in one thousand six hundred and seventeen.
Since then, potential heirs to the throne began to be imprisoned in special rooms in the palace, known as shimshirlyk or kafes. These ""golden cages"" were located in the third courtyard in the immediate vicinity of the harem.
Princes were forbidden to communicate with each other and go outside the premises, but they were allowed to have infertile concubines and servants.
Around the clock, each of them was guarded by a special detachment of eunuchs. It is not surprising that, despite the luxury, many shehzadeh ended up either dying of boredom, or going crazy, or just getting drunk.