Suleiman I was one of the main acting figures in the entire history of the Ottoman Empire. It was under him that the country reached the peak of its power. It is not for nothing that the tenth representative of the Ottoman family entered history under the name Magnificent.
He became sultan in September one thousand five hundred and twenty, at the age of twenty-five. From the first days on the throne, Suleiman proved himself to be a wise ruler.
He was not as bloodthirsty as his father Selim I, but at the same time respected traditions and did not consider it shameful to kill enemies for the good of the state. Literally his whole life was connected with the expansion of borders and the strengthening of the role of the Ottoman Empire in the world.
In the intervals between the wars, Suleiman was fond of philosophy, wrote poetry, engaged in jewelry art and even cast cannons with his own hands. During his reign, many wonderful and grandiose buildings appeared in Istanbul.
He liked to dress up as a poor man or a rich foreigner and walk alone through the markets, wanting to find out about the real attitude of his subjects towards him. However, the people loved their ruler, because he did a lot to spread education and prosperity of craft guilds.
The sultan's personal life was also amazing. As it should be, Suleiman had four wives, but only one of them, who went down in history under the name of Hurrem (laughing), won his heart.
He had just ascended the throne when Rustem Pasha delivered to his harem a fifteen-year-old Slavic woman, stolen by Crimean Tatars from the Ukrainian town of Rohatin and sold at the slave market. Literally from the very first days Anastasia Lisovskaya, known in Europe as Roksolana, won the heart of the young ruler.
An educated, well-read girl was able to achieve incredible heights. She became the first slave to receive the title of haseki, or beloved wife, which Suleiman the Magnificent introduced especially for her.
In addition, she was the only woman who managed to give birth to the sultan of six children, to remain his favorite until the last days and at the same time the mother of the younger Shehzade.
At court, Roksolana was disliked, considering her a Slavic witch. However, she responded to this dislike in the spirit of the times, repeatedly becoming the initiator and participant of numerous intrigues and conspiracies.
Suleiman himself trusted his haseki so much that he left the management of the empire to her when he left for foreign military campaigns.
On behalf of the sovereign, Hurrem received foreign ambassadors, answered letters from foreign rulers, influential nobles and people of art. She patronized merchants, was interested in sciences and noticeably changed the face of Istanbul.
The image of Roksolana has always been shrouded in mystery. It is not surprising that many legends and legends have been put together about her, which are the basis for numerous novels, novellas and films.