Tens of thousands of tulips bloom in Gulhane Park every spring. The love for these bright colors originated in the Ottoman Empire in ancient times.
As the legends say, at a time when most of the territory of Turkey was occupied by Persia, Crown Prince Farhad lived here. He was passionately in love with a girl named Shirin. And when false news was brought to the prince about the death of his beloved, Farhad, distraught with grief, jumped on his horse and drove him straight to the rocks.
On the spot where the blood of a beautiful young man was spilled, a scarlet tulip appeared the next day. Since then, the flower has become a symbol of passionate love and happiness.
It is curious that in the Turkish language the flower was called "lale", and its inscription in Arabic script was akin to the word "Allah". Therefore, already in the eleventh century, the tulip became part of the culture of the Seljuk Turks, and later the main symbol of the rulers of the Ottoman Empire.
Already under Mehmed II, the image of a tulip was considered sacred. They decorated the interiors of mosques, helmets and shields of the defenders of the empire, depicted on dishes, ceramics and expensive carpets.
Tulips were especially widespread during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent.
It was then that for the first time a flower with pointed petals was brought out, the image of which could only be worn by members of the ruling dynasty: the sultan himself, his sisters, daughters, mother, and beloved wives.
Under Suleiman's son Selim II, the prices of bulbs skyrocketed. Sometimes they were valued more than human life.
And during the reign of Ahmed III, the real tulip mania began. Even the period of cultural reforms of that time went down in history under the name of the Tulip Era.
This beautiful flower retained its leading role in culture until the fall of the empire. However, even today he enjoys due attention and respect.
Tulips and ornaments with their images are especially appreciated by local women, because it is believed that this magical flower gives them physical strength and sexual attractiveness.