The Column of Constantine on Chamberlitash Square is one of the oldest Roman monuments in Istanbul. It was erected in the three hundred and twenty-eighth year by Emperor Constantine the Great, as one of the main symbols of the birth of the new city.
With all due respect to Christianity, Constantine the Great remained a pagan until his last days. According to ancient customs, he dedicated the new city to Fate and gave it the secret priestly name of Anfusa.
Constantine was convinced that the happiness and prosperity of the capital depended on the presence of a Palladium hidden in the city - an ancient image of the goddess Pallas Athena. So he took a Trojan statuette of a Greek goddess from Rome.
There is an opinion that he hid it at the base of his own column erected in the center of the forum of the same name. Along with Athena, the ax handle of Noah, the staff of Moses, baskets with the remains of the loaves with which Jesus Christ fed five thousand people, and other Christian relics were embedded in the foot.
The column itself was made of porphyry - one of the most valuable materials of that time. The top was decorated with a golden statue of the Emperor Constantine himself in a crown with seven rays. According to legend, a nail from the Life-giving Cross of the Lord was fused into the crown.
Konstantin himself treated this column very reverently. Every time he passed by, the emperor got down from his horse and forced all the citizens of the empire to do the same.
Unfortunately, fate did not spare the ancient monument. It has repeatedly suffered from earthquakes and natural disasters. Already in the fourth century, Theodosius II, for safety, had to pull the column with hoops, and during the reign of Alexei Komnenos, the statue of the emperor was struck by lightning, and a gilded cross was installed on top.
The column of Constantine and the Crusaders, who were looking for religious values inside it, caused irreparable damage. The Turks turned out to be much more loyal: they kept the monument unchanged, only removed the Christian cross.
Perhaps today the monument would have looked much more decent if in the one thousand seven hundred and seventy-ninth year the column with the adjacent buildings had not been engulfed by fire. Cracked and blackened with soot, it was bound with iron hoops by order of the ruling Sultan Abdul Hamid I.
At the same time, it began to be called Chamberlitash or ""the rock with hoops"".