During its one thousand five hundred-year history, Hagia Sophia has acquired a considerable number of legends and legends.
The first of them tells about the Angel of St. Sophia, who lived at the south-eastern pillar of the gallery. It is said that during the construction of the cathedral, the workers stopped for lunch, leaving a little boy to guard the inventory.
An Angel appeared to him, who told the boy to return to the workers and ask them to work tirelessly. To which he replied that he could not move away from his place, as he had to guard the inventory. The angel promised to guard for him.
The child hurried to the builders, among whom was the Emperor Justinian. After hearing the story, he quickly counted his eunuchs and realized that the boy had seen an unearthly creature. Immediately he sent the child away from the construction site, so that the angel would forever remain to guard the new church.
Nevertheless, the angel still left St. Sophia. A few days before the decisive assault on Constantinople by the Ottomans, fiery tongues burst out of the forty windows of the drum of the temple, which rose up and disappeared behind the opened heavenly gates.
The next morning, the Patriarch told Emperor Constantine XI that the angel of St. Sophia had left this city and the temple. Constantinople is doomed. Soon the drooping army lost the decisive battle.
No less attention is attracted by the Crying column, near which a small queue is always built. According to legend, during the construction of the cathedral, Emperor Justinian often had a headache.
One day he leaned against a pillar and was immediately healed. In the eleventh century, the spirit of Gregory the Wonderworker was seen next to the column. Since then, marble has been exuding moisture.
The Turks surrounded the column with copper sheets, leaving a hole in it. There is an opinion that if you put your finger inside and turn clockwise, you can heal from diseases and fulfill any desire.
Another mystical place is the so-called Hand of Fate. A human palm print that is visible at a four-meter height on one of the inner walls of the temple.
Two legends are connected with him at once. One of them, the Byzantine one, tells that during the capture of Constantinople by the Turks, the Mother of God appeared in the church, who spread her Veil over the parishioners. She accidentally touched the wall with her hand, and an imprint was formed.
The Turks altered the legend in their own way and associated it with Mehmed the Conqueror. When the victorious Sultan wished to enter St. Sophia, ten thousand people had already been killed here. The horse, climbing over the corpses, was frightened by what he saw and reared up, then to keep his balance, Mehmed touched the wall with a bloody hand.
Another legend is associated with a niche in the southern part of the cathedral, from which there is always a slight noise. When, during the last liturgy, detachments of fierce Janissaries broke into the temple, a priest stood at this niche and read prayers. But suddenly the walls parted, and he was able to hide.
As the legends say, the priest reads his prayers even now, he will appear to the world only when Hagia Sophia becomes Christian again.
A lot of unknown things are hidden in the underground part of the temple. According to the chronicles, a seventy-meter pit was dug under the floor of Hagia Sophia. It housed huge water storage tanks and numerous tunnels, where burials were conducted for centuries.
Attempts to explore the flooded dungeons have been conducted since nineteen forty-five, however, even today divers have not been able to make a complete picture of these dungeons.