A New mosque (Yeni-Jami) adjoins the Egyptian Bazaar from the north-eastern side.
Despite the name, it is difficult to call the mosque new, since its construction was completed in one thousand six hundred and sixty-fifth year. It was a real long-term construction of the Ottoman Empire.
The construction of the mosque next to the customs and the port was conceived at the end of the sixteenth century by the wife of Murad III Safiye-Sultan.
In those distant times, this territory was occupied by a Jewish trading quarter, and the construction of a mosque would strengthen Muslim influence among foreigners.
Having received the support of the people, Valide began construction. However, the close groundwater and the location on the hillside required huge costs to strengthen the foundation. There was a catastrophic shortage of money for construction, and Safiye decided to cut the salaries of the janissaries.
They, in turn, sharpened their grudge against the sultana, and when the grandson of Walide Ahmed I reigned as ruler, they persuaded him to send his grandmother away from politics to the Old Palace.
After Valide's death, the construction site was abandoned, and the territory was quickly populated by Jews who returned to their homes. But in one thousand six hundred and sixty, all their houses were reduced to ashes by a devastating fire.
It was the charred ashes that attracted the mother of Mehmed IV and the attention of Valide Turhan Hatice Sultan. In just five years, the Ottoman long-term construction has finally acquired its final appearance.
The money for the mosque came from the widows' funds of the Turkhans, which Turkish husbands left to their wives ""for shoes."" Therefore, often a New mosque is also called the ""mosque of shoes"".
It is curious that Yeni-Jami became the first truly female mosque in the Ottoman Empire. This is not accidental, since the power of women at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was unusually strong.
Take at least Turkhan-Sultan, who in many ways repeated the fate of her predecessor Hurrem.
The Slavic girl Nadia was brought to Istanbul by the Crimean Khan as a gift to the mother of Ibrahim I Kesem Sultan. The son of Kesem and the future husband Turhan was a mad man, so the affairs of the empire were mostly managed by his mother.
The ruler's health rapidly deteriorated, and as a result, Kesem decided to remove Ibrahim from the throne in favor of her growing grandson Mehmed IV.
After a brutal murder, a six-year-old boy turned out to be at the head of the empire. According to the laws, his mother Turhan Hatice was to become regent under him, but Kesem did not want to give her power. A serious struggle for influence began between the women, which ended with the fact that the rope from the curtain was already tightened around Kesem's neck.
Having removed all rivals, the former girl Nadia, who at that time was barely over twenty, found herself at the head of a huge powerful empire. It is worth saying that she coped brilliantly with her tasks. Almost until the last days, Valide helped her son Mehmed IV to run the business.
Together with him and his descendants, Turkhan Hatice Sultan found her last rest in a turban next to her beloved mosque.
Here, on the small square of Yeni-Jami in the immediate vicinity of the shores of the Golden Horn, we will finish our audio tour. We hope she helped you learn a lot of new and interesting things about Istanbul and its amazing sights.
If you liked this walk, support the application with an assessment in the App Store, because it helps to travel much more budget-friendly and interesting, and inspires us to create new exciting routes.
Thank you for choosing an audio tour and we wish you vivid impressions of this amazing and atmospheric city.