The busy Kennedy Avenue thoroughfare runs along the Golden Horn Bay, the Bosphorus Strait and the Sea of Marmara, repeating the outlines of the ancient city walls, partially preserved since the Middle Ages.
However, the confluence of the Golden Horn and the Bosphorus enjoyed unprecedented popularity long before the new era.
Already in the seventh century before the Birth of Christ, colonists from the Greek Megara founded the first city here — Byzantium, with the emergence of which several legends are associated.
The first of them says that the Megarians, when choosing a place, turned to the oracle for advice, and he ordered to build a city "opposite the settlement of the blind."
Arriving at the Bosphorus Strait under the leadership of the brave warrior and hunter Byzant, the colonists saw Chalcedon on the opposite shore.
In the inhabitants of Chalcedon, Byzant recognized the image of the blind, who did not see the obvious advantages of the Golden Horn.
According to another legend, the oracle advised the Megarians to build a city where deer and fish are abundant. At first, Byzant thought that this place was located between the Kidaris and Barbis rivers.
However, during the sacrifice, a kite flew in, grabbed the heart of the slain animal and carried it to the end of the cape near the Bosphorus Strait. Byzant took this as a sign, and laid out a city on a hill near the Bosphorus.
At the same time, in the era of the ancient Greeks, the polis acquired the first fortress walls.
Located on the border of Europe and Asia, it often suffered from raids and destruction. However, by the middle of the century before our era, Byzantium had become the busiest port on the entire sea route from Athens to Bosporus.
The Romans, who replaced the Greeks, took away most of the powers from Byzantium. And Septimius Severus completely enslaved the settlement, turning it into a distant Roman province.
The new heyday of the city came at the beginning of the fourth century, when the Emperor Constantine came to power in Rome.
Having seen many prophecies in his dreams, Constantine, following another vision, decided to move the capital of the Roman Empire to a new place, and the voice of the Christian God he recognized ordered him to choose Byzantium.
Recreated from the ashes, already under Constantine the Great, the city turned into one of the largest in Europe and the Middle East.
By the Middle Ages, New Rome, called Constantinople, became the political, cultural and economic center of the powerful Byzantine Empire.
And there seemed to be nothing that could hinder its prosperity. But fate decreed otherwise. In May, one thousand four hundred and fifty-three, Constantinople was captured by the Turks under the leadership of Mehmed the Second, who went down in history as Fatih (the Conqueror).
After a two-month siege, the capital of Byzantium fell. Literally overnight, the victors turned Constantinople into the main city of the Ottoman Empire.
However, despite the ruthlessness of Mehmed the Second and his descendants, many monuments of previous eras still managed to survive.
Therefore, now you can take a real journey through time and appreciate the entire multiculturalism of the city, which has played an important role in the development of world civilizations for several thousand years.