We will start our audio tour at the Sirkeci Railway Station.
Designed by German architect August Jahmund at the end of the twentieth century, it is rightfully considered one of the most luxurious buildings of the Art Nouveau era in Istanbul.
In its appearance, the station has preserved several styles characteristic of both the West and the East. According to the author's idea, it was supposed to become a kind of architectural symbol of the connection between Europe and Asia
This idea was not accidental at all. It was at Sirkeci station that the famous transcontinental train "Orient Express" arrived, plying between Istanbul and Paris.
To open a "window to Europe", the magnanimous Sultan Abdul-Aziz even allowed the demolition of part of his Topkapi residence.
On the other hand, kings, presidents, writers, artists, journalists and other famous personalities arriving on the platform, descending from the footboard of the train, found themselves in the very center of the social and political life of the Ottoman Empire.
Many of them did not miss the opportunity to miss a cup of tea or fine Turkish coffee in the bohemian restaurant "Orient Express".
For a century and a half of existence at the Sirkeci station, almost nothing has changed: the same monumental walls, the same stained glass windows, the same platform, the same bell that in the twentieth century informed the audience about the departure trains, the same bohemian restaurant "Orient Express", which is increasingly visited not by politicians, but by numerous tourists…
Only the legendary train was gone. The route was closed in the seventies of the last century. In memory of him, there was only a steam locomotive standing at the walls of the station, and some items that became part of the exposition of the railway museum.
Nowadays, Sirkeci Railway Station serves only local routes and several flights to Eastern European countries, and is also part of the Marmaray underground tunnel connecting the European side of Istanbul with the Asian side.