The supply of Constantinople with fresh water has always been the primary task of the ruling emperors. To do this, back in the time of Constantine the Great, reservoirs or cisterns were built here to collect water entering the city through aqueducts. To this day, about forty such tanks have been discovered.
Now you are at the entrance to the underground cistern of the Basilica - the most grandiose structure for storing water in Constantinople.
It was built for more than two hundred years, starting from the reign of Constantine the Great and ending with Justinian. The huge reservoir was designed to supply water to the palace and the city's population of many thousands. In total, it contained about one hundred thousand tons of water and regularly performed its functions until the fall of the Byzantine Empire.
The walls of the cistern are made of burnt Roman bricks, four meters thick, and covered with a water-repellent solution, the composition of which has not been solved so far. By the way, even today this solution perfectly copes with the tasks set.
The perimeter of the tank is supported by three hundred and thirty-six columns of eight-meter height. Most of them were brought from ancient temples, therefore, despite the external similarity, they still differ in grades of marble and types of processing.
The most famous are the so-called ""crying column"", decorated with ornaments in the form of tears and fulfilling wishes, as well as two columns resting on pedestals in the form of the heads of the Gorgon medusa. Both figures are inverted. There is an opinion that this was done on purpose so that the monster could not turn those looking at it into stone.
The Ottomans who came to Constantinople did not immediately discover the underground cistern. It was actively used only in the middle of the sixteenth century for watering the gardens of the Topkapi Palace. Later, the underground reservoir was completely forgotten, turning into a huge dump.
The Basilica cistern found a new life only in the eighties of the last century, when it was cleared of tons of garbage and dirt, it was opened for everyone to visit.
Nowadays there is much less water here, nevertheless, the forest of columns growing out of the semi-darkness makes an indelible impression.
It is not surprising that the tank has been used more than once in the cinema. For example, episodes of the James Bond film ""From Russia with Love"", the mini-series ""Odyssey"", as well as scenes of the film adaptation of Dan Brown's book ""Inferno"" were filmed here.