Mehmed II, who after the conquest of Constantinople introduced the tradition of building sultan mosques on the territory of the city, and his son Bayezid II followed his father's example.
For the construction of the shrine, he chose a vast square, where the forum of Theodosius has been located since the fourth century. The ruins came in handy, and were used for building materials for a new structure.
It is curious that the Bayezid Mosque became the first in the religious architecture of the Ottoman Empire, built in the image and likeness of the Hagia Sophia. Later, this principle formed the basis for the construction of most Istanbul mosques.
Like the Grand viziers, the sultans of the Ottoman Empire sought to erect not just mosques, but cullies - huge religious complexes serving for charitable purposes. Visitors had to remember the customer with a kind word, which, according to legend, helped him to receive rewards from Allah after his death.
Thus, the Bayazid Mosque also included an elementary school, a madrasah, an imaret, a hamam, a hospital and a caravanserai. In a quiet garden, luxurious turbas are built, where Sultan Bayezid II himself and his daughter Selchuk Sultan and Grand Vizier Mustafa Reshid Pasha found their last rest.
For many years, the courtyard of the mosque was occupied by a book market. It was considered one of the oldest in the world, because it was opened during the Byzantine Empire.
After the conquest of Constantinople, turban makers and metal engravers occupied the territory, but by the beginning of the seventeenth century booksellers began to move here again.
There were also so-called fortune-telling shops in the market, where dreams were interpreted and solitaire games were played on the sand. It was in such shops that the art of Ottoman poetry was born. This was largely facilitated by the appearance in Istanbul of the father of the romantic poem Eyvaz Zati.
Ugly, deaf, and also addicted to alcohol, he never got into the sultan's palace. Nevertheless, he received favor from Bayezid II for the opening of a fortune-telling shop.
Within a few years, it became one of the most popular literary clubs of its time. Literally all novice authors came here to present their poems to Zati's court.
He shamelessly corrected their works and often passed them off as his own. Sometimes such actions ended in conflicts, but Zati still brought his best students to people.
The love of books was inherent not only to the residents of seventeenth-century Istanbul, but also to Bayezid II himself.
It is not surprising that a public library with a rich collection of manuscripts appeared on the territory of the vast complex.
The mosque itself, despite the destruction during the earthquakes, has survived to this day almost unchanged, which makes it one of the oldest religious buildings of Ottoman architecture in Istanbul.