Perhaps you have already noticed that the name of Constantine the Great is often heard in Istanbul, and he is worth dedicating a separate story to him.
Even in his youth, having made a brilliant military career, Konstantin managed to unite the vast expanses of the Roman Empire under his command.
The historical chronicles mention an episode of the decisive battle of Constantine with the Emperor Maxentius, who ruled in Rome. The numbers of the armies were not equal, and the cross that appeared in the sky on the eve of the decisive battle did not inspire the enthusiasm of the pagan army of Constantine.
But in a dream, the future emperor heard the voice of the One God, who, holding out the cross to him, said: ""Win this."" The next morning, Constantine ordered his soldiers to draw crosses on their shields, and as a result, Maxentius' huge army was smashed to smithereens.
Having concentrated power in his hands, Constantine decides to found a new capital of the Roman Empire.
To do this, he called together the pundits and sent them to look for a suitable place in Asia, Libya and Europe. When they returned, they praised Macedonia and Byzantium most of all, and the voice of God that came in a dream helped determine the final choice. 
Having gathered his family, Konstantin went to the place. Defeated by Septimius Severus, Byzantium appeared before the emperor very sad. But at night the emperor saw a noble lady who suddenly turned into a beautiful young girl, whom he gifted with signs of power. Konstantin decided that the city itself appeared in this image, and it was up to him to restore its former greatness and wealth.
In November of the three hundred and twenty-fourth year, they began to erect city walls, inside which, like mushrooms after rain, beautiful palaces, fountains, water pipes, baths, forums and other public buildings began to grow. Marble columns, valuable manuscripts, the best sculptures and relics of saints were brought to the construction site from all over the empire…
It was Constantine who became the first Roman emperor to officially allow Christians to profess their faith. At the same time, he did not forbid the pagans of Byzantium to perform their rituals.
Six years later, in May of the three hundred and thirtieth year, the emperor together with the patriarch consecrated the built capital under the name of New Rome. But the name did not catch on, and very soon Byzantium began to be called the city of Constantine - Constantinople.
Despite the huge number of God's signs and openness to the new faith, Constantine the Great remained a pagan until the last days. At the same time, he worshipped both the Cross and the Sun, built Christian churches and supported the cults of ancient Roman gods.
It was only on his deathbed that the emperor finally converted to Christianity, and later he was canonized, both in the Orthodox and Catholic churches.