Opposite Hagia Sophia stands the Sultanahmet Mosque - a masterpiece of Ottoman architecture and the main shrine of Istanbul.
It got its name in honor of Sultan Ahmed I, who initiated its construction at the beginning of the seventeenth century.
Ahmed had to ascend the throne in difficult times - the Ottoman Empire suffered defeat after defeat.
The Sultan urgently needed to maintain the authority of the authorities, and at the age of nineteen he started an ambitious project - to build a shrine that surpassed the Byzantine Hagia Sophia in its grandeur.
It is not surprising that many legends are associated with the construction of the mosque.
One of them tells about the architect Sedefkar Mehmet-agha. An Albanian by birth, he arrived in Istanbul to serve in the detachment of the sultan's janissaries. However, he soon became seriously interested in architecture and even became the right hand of the best Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan.
Unfortunately, after the death of the teacher, Mehmet-aga could not be occupied.
And then one day he had a dream in which the holy spirit showed Sedefkar a mosque of amazing beauty and asked him to build it for the glory of Allah. The next morning, the architect depicted the building in detail on paper.
The drawing was delivered to the Sultan. Ahmed, who intended to build a mosque, saw the project and immediately appointed an elderly architect as the head of the construction site. 
Another legend is associated with six minarets. It was typical to build mosques with four minarets. And Sultanahmet was no exception.
However, the sovereign wanted these minarets to be made of pure gold, but the architect, who by the time of construction was already over seventy, did not hear the word ""altyn"" (golden), it seemed to him that the sultan said ""alty"" (six). Therefore, appropriate adjustments were quickly made to the project.
When they found out about the audacity of the Ottoman ruler in Mecca, where six minarets also towered, the act was regarded as sacrilege. As a result, Ahmed had to fork out for the construction of the seventh minaret for the al-Haram mosque.
Fantastic outside, inside Sultanahmet also impresses with luxury and splendor, and for the abundance of blue-white Iznik tiles, the mosque is often called Blue.
The huge space is filled with light that pours from two hundred and sixty windows. Almost all of them are decorated with Venetian glass with stained glass windows. The mihrab is made of a single piece of marble and decorated with gilding. A black stone brought from Mecca is installed on it.
Pay attention to the separate entrance on the western side of the mosque, It was used by the sultan, who rode into the courtyard of the structure on a horse. However, in order to remember his insignificance before Allah, a chain was stretched for the sultan, forcing him to bow all the time.
Unfortunately, Ahmed did not admire his creation for long. Already in one thousand six hundred and seventeen, a year after the completion of construction, the twenty-seven-year-old sultan died of typhus. And a few months later, the chief architect, who clearly surpassed his teacher with this mosque, also passed away.