The pink building with several domed roofs, bounding Sultanahmet Square on the east side, is a public hamam built at the insistence of Suleiman the Magnificent's beloved wife, Hurrem Sultan, also known as Roksolana.
According to legend, when Hurrem was pregnant once again, the treacherous vizier Ibrahim Pasha threw poisonous snakes into the fountain where the sultan's wife was washing. The woman managed to avoid a fatal bite, but when Suleiman found out about the incident, it was decided to dismantle the fountain and arrange public baths in its place.
A difficult task was assigned to Mimar Sinan, who realized it by one thousand five hundred and fifty-sixth year.
Curiously, the Hurrem Sultan hammam became the first Turkish bath, where both male and female halves were housed under one roof. They did not intersect with each other in any way. The male entrance was on the side of Hagia Sophia, and the female entrance was on the side of the Blue Mosque.
Each half included a changing room, a cool room and a main bath room with a marble slab for warming up, steaming and massage.
In general, the tradition of bathing in baths came to the Ottoman Empire from Byzantium. In the third century, on the site of the future baths of Roksolana, there were already grandiose baths of Zeuxippus, which were used for their intended purpose until the beginning of the eighth century.
The Turks have made the tradition of washing in the hammam an integral part of their culture. After all, no Muslim prayer is performed without ablution.
For centuries, a visit to the hamam was even included in the marriage contract. According to him, a man was obliged to give his woman money for a weekly trip to the bath. If he refused, the spouse had the right to appeal to a judge or even demand a divorce.
Hamam Hurrem-Sultan performed his direct functions until the fall of the Ottoman Empire. Later, the public baths managed to visit the archive, fuel depot and carpet shop. But already in the two thousand and eighth year, restoration began, as a result of which the hamam was returned to its former appearance and original functions.
Nowadays, as many centuries ago, public baths are located here. Anyone can visit them, but you should not count on democratic prices.