In addition to the column of Constantine, many monuments of Ottoman culture can be found on Chamberlitash Square.
So to the west of the column rises the modest mosque of Atik Ali Pasha. It was built at the end of the fifteenth century with the money of the Vizier Bayezid II and Ali Pasha.
The vizier, modest by nature, did not build a magnificent mosque. Without further ado, he decided to repeat in it the appearance of the oldest Fatih mosque in Istanbul. However, the prototype was actually rebuilt after the earthquake of one thousand seven hundred and sixty-six, but a smaller copy in the form of the Atik Ali Pasha mosque has remained unchanged since its construction.
Hamam Chamberlitash is located opposite the mosque. It is also considered one of the oldest in Istanbul and dates back to the end of the sixteenth century.
Public baths were built with the money of Selim II's wife and Nurbana-Sultan. The exterior is square, the building inside has the shape of a circle, and its marble benches and dome have been preserved since construction.
To the left of the hamam is a caravanserai, built on the instructions of the Vizier Fazyl Ahmed Pasha in one thousand six hundred and sixty.
It is noteworthy that until the middle of the nineteenth century, it was possible to buy not only goods, but also slaves, and quite officially. Nowadays, a small shopping complex is still located in the caravanserai.
Well, the Nuruosmaniye Mosque, standing in the depths, completes the appearance of the square. This monument of Islamic architecture is considered the youngest on Chamberlitash, as it was built in the middle of the eighteenth century with the assistance of Sultans Mahmud I and Osman III.
The mosque is unique in that its appearance is dominated by features of the Baroque style, so popular in Europe at that time and absolutely not characteristic of Ottoman architecture. The name ""Nuruosmanie"" corresponds to the pretentious style and translates as ""the sacred light of Osman"".
In addition to the mosque, the complex has a madrasah (religious school), an imaret (canteen for the needy), a fountain, a library of manuscripts, as well as the mausoleum of Osman III's mother - Valide Shehsuvar Sultan.