The vast territory of forty hectares between the Augusteion and the Sea of Marmara in Byzantine times was occupied by a Large Imperial Palace.
The first buildings of the complex appeared in these places even under Constantine the Great, Later the rulers who were replaced on the throne repeatedly expanded and strengthened their residence.
As a result, a whole mini-city has grown up, made up of detached palaces, churches and office premises. Conventionally, the whole complex was divided into three parts: Halka, Daphne and the Sacred Palace of the Emperor.
There were legends about the wealth of its state halls. The ambassadors who visited Constantinople noted that the food at the feasts was served only on golden dishes, and the fruit vases were so heavy that they had to be lifted onto the tables with the help of winches.
The throne room of the emperor was no less impressive. It was decorated with silver, gold and precious stones and was used for most of the court ceremonies. And there was also an icon of the Savior, before which the emperor prayed daily.
Another famous hall, the Magnavra, was often called a separate palace. Here the emperor gave audiences to foreign ambassadors, who were first impressed with mechanical toys. There were among them birds flapping their wings on a golden tree, and lions climbing the cliffs and growling hollowly at the emperor's entrance.
The palace grew and developed until the eleventh century, until the Komnenos who came to power preferred to him a residence in Blachernae.
The last owner of the Byzantine residence was the emperor of the Latin Empire Baldwin III, who was so in need of money that he was forced to dismantle and sell part of the lead roof.
Paleologists have completely forgotten the imperial residence in the center of Constantinople. As a result, by the arrival of the Turks, there was practically nothing left of it.
The only building that has survived to this day is the Bukolebnovsky Palace, located on the shore of the Marmara Sea, although now it is a very sad sight.
And at the beginning of the twentieth century, as a result of archaeological excavations, it was possible to accidentally discover some rooms of the palace, prison cells and burials.
The most valuable finds were floor mosaics of the fourth and fifth centuries depicting the daily life of the Byzantines, wild animals and mythological subjects.
In total, about two thousand square meters of mosaic floors were found, and up to forty thousand colored pieces were laid out on each of them. Nowadays, ninety luxurious mosaics have become exhibits of the Mosaic Museum opened on the territory of the former Imperial Palace.