You can feel a little like a sultan on the observation deck of Cape Sarayburnu, which offers a wonderful panorama of the Golden Horn and the Bosphorus Strait.
To the west of the Bosphorus stretches the Golden Horn Bay, dividing the European part of Istanbul into northern and southern halves.
From time immemorial, this convenient natural harbor was simply called Horned Bay. There is an opinion that such a name was born due to the similarity of the shape of the bay with the "cornucopia", as well as due to the abundance of fish that the first settlers could catch here with their bare hands.
Sheltered from stormy winds, Horned Bay was eventually highly appreciated by numerous merchants. Navigators stopped here to replenish food and fresh water supplies.
The bay also played a special role during the siege of Constantinople by the Ottomans. Thanks to the chains stretched on the Bosphorus, Turkish ships could not occupy this strategically important harbor for a long time.
All attempts to approach the chain were repulsed by counter attacks of the Greek fleet. However, ten days after the start of the siege, the Turks pulled off a unique engineering operation. They decided to transfer warships from the Bosphorus to the Golden Horn by land.
To do this, the Turks paved a two-mile road from the current Dolmabahce Palace to the Kasym Pasha Valley through a sixty-meter hill. It was covered with thick wooden rollers, greased with lard and oil, and in just one night, with the help of horses, oxen and a large army, seventy galleys and crews were transferred to the northern part of the Golden Horn by the dim light of torches.
The enemy ships seriously undermined the morale of the defenders of Constantinople, and fifty days later the capital of the mighty Byzantine Empire finally fell.
There is a legend that when Mehmed entered Constantinople, he ordered all the local nobles to bring the available wealth to the central square.
When he saw the huge piles of gold, he exclaimed that only madmen, having such untold treasures, could not save their city.
Immediately all the nobles of Constantinople were killed, and their treasures, according to legend, were drowned at the bottom of the Horned Bay. Because of this, allegedly, it was called Golden.
Of course, this story doesn't sound particularly plausible. Most likely, the Golden Horned Bay received its romantic prefix thanks to the shades with which its waters shimmer in the rays of the setting sun.