The Egyptian bazaar is a real paradise for sweet tooths and lovers of the aroma of spices.
It is here that you can find mountains of lukuma, baklava and other goodies that persistent sellers will not only give you a taste, but also carefully wrapped in a beautiful gift box.
Istanbul's second largest indoor market has a fairly ancient history. It began to be built in one thousand five hundred and ninety-seventh year on the instructions of the mother of Sultan Mehmed III Safiye-sultan.
However, after the death of one of the most influential women of the Ottoman Empire, the construction was abandoned and completed only sixty-seven years later at the insistence of another valide, Turkhan Hatice Sultan.
At that time, the market played the role of a madrasah and was part of the kulliye at the neighboring Yeni-Jami mosque, and chance helped him to radically change his role.
One day Turhan Hatice-sultan decided to visit an educational institution and see what the students were doing. There were no classes that day, and the students whiled away the time in idle idleness.
Not noticing the sultan's mother, one of them said: ""Everyone is fine with this madrasah! It's just a pity that the sultana did not take care of entertainment for us!"" The woman was so offended by what she heard that she immediately ordered to disperse all the students and arrange a bazaar on the site of the madrasah.
At first it was called ""New"" in honor of the neighboring mosque and ""Maternal"", in memory of the women who built it. And only after some time, the name ""Egyptian"" was fixed for the market, where spices were mainly sold.
The first floor of the building, made in the form of the Latin letter L, was occupied by small shops and shops in the amount of eighty pieces, and on the second floor there was something like a court where all disputes between merchants and the population were resolved.
Nowadays, on the second floor there is a very pretentious restaurant ""Pandeli"", which has been visited by many outstanding people from the world of politics and cinema for more than a hundred years.
As for the first floor, it is still occupied by shops selling not only popular and rare seasonings and spices, but also all kinds of sweets, herbal and tea preparations, dried fruits, nuts, handmade soap, leather goods, textiles, ceramics, jewelry and, of course, souvenirs.