The invention and distribution of the so-called Turkish coffee, which the Turks simply call kahwe, is also attributed to Suleiman the Magnificent.
According to one legend, the pasha of Yemen, which was part of the Ottoman Empire, sent coffee beans as a sign of gratitude to the young sultan.
At that time, the Ottoman palace was famous all over the world for its luxurious cuisine. In order to conquer the heart of the beloved ruler, the chef decided to come up with his own way of cooking grains and even invented for these purposes a special jezva dish, better known here under the name ""turk"".
The rich taste of coffee pleased Suleiman and his entourage. At first, it was available only to the ruler and the highest nobility, but a few years later the first public coffee shops began to open in Istanbul.
Quite a lot of them were on the square in front of the Suleymaniye Mosque. It was here, according to legend, that the profession of a coffee maker was born.
Coffee shops were often located in gardens where leaves rustled and water gurgled.
The drink was served to the guests in small cups the size of half a shell of a chicken egg. It was black, without sugar and cream. Traditionally, only a glass of water, sherbet and a pipe were used for coffee. For such a lazy pastime, more than one evening could fly by unnoticed.
To somehow brighten up the lazy silence, the owners of coffee shops often invited ""medaks"" (storytellers) who told visitors interesting stories and legends. During religious holidays, their stories entertained visitors from sunrise to sunset.
Sometimes dervishes, young reformers or janissaries calling for an uprising tried to speak in coffee shops. Yes, but all these revolutionary thoughts, as a rule, did not occupy the languid audience.
Nevertheless, Selim II, who was afraid of conspiracies, ordered the coffee shops to be closed as hotbeds of freethinking. But the tradition of drinking coffee could not be eradicated.
After all, for a Turk, coffee is not just a drink, but a poetic nectar that gives joy, fun and purity of consciousness. It is not for nothing that it has become an integral part of Turkish culture.