An integral part of the appearance of Istanbul is made up of numerous bazaars, the most famous of which is rightfully considered Kapalycharshi (indoor market) or Grand Bazaar. It began to be built under Mehmed the Conqueror on the site of the largest market in Constantinople.
According to Muslim canons, the basis of the market was the so-called bedestans - massive stone buildings with iron bars. It was in them that the brisk trade was conducted.
The first to appear on the vast territory of the complex were the Inner and Sandalwood Bedestans, separated by the ruins of ancient Christian churches.
Mehmed wanted to make Istanbul a major trading center at the junction of Europe and Asia, so merchants were granted various privileges, among which the main role was taken by protection from theft. Moreover, the protection was quite real.
So one case went down in history when a certain Persian merchant stole thirty thousand gold coins from another. The market was closed for two weeks, and after the thief was found, the sultan ordered him to hang among the shops to intimidate potential criminals.
By the time of the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent, the bazaar was replenished with new streets and became known as the Grand or Grand Bazaar. Even then there were at least three thousand retail outlets here.
Because of such a density of shops, the market was often engulfed by fires; earthquakes caused no less trouble to wooden structures. Nevertheless, it was always rebuilt again.
After all, for the Turks The Grand Bazaar is not just a retail space, but a real city within a city with its mosques, fountains, baths, schools and even its own cemetery. It is not for nothing that there is a philosophical opinion among the people that you can be born, live, study, work and die here.
Modern The Grand Bazaar is considered one of the largest indoor markets in the world. It occupies a gigantic territory, on which sixty-six ornate streets and almost four and a half shops and shops are located.
You can buy literally everything here. Like in the cave of Ali Baba, the Grand Bazaar hides a lot of treasures: expensive fabrics, spices, shawls, gold jewelry, ceramics, antiques and much more.
And do not forget that you are in the oriental bazaar, where it is not only possible, but also necessary to bargain. However, it's worth a look here, even if you don't plan to buy anything.